THIS
IS NOT
AN ATLAS
EDITED BY KOLLEKTIV ORANGOTANGO+

A GLOBAL COLLECTION OF COUNTER-CARTOGRAPHIES

THIS
IS NOT
AN ATLAS

Impressum
First published in 2018 by transcript Verlag, Bielefeld
© kollektiv orangotango+ (ed.): Severin Halder, Karl Heyer, Boris Michel,
Silke Greth, Nico Baumgarten, Philip Boos, Janina Dobrusskin,
Paul Schweizer, Laurenz Virchow, Christoph Lambio;
chapters by respective authors
Design by Nico Baumgarten
Proofread by Philip Boos & Johanna Ellsworth
Production managed by Die Produktion, Düsseldorf
First edition of 3.000 copies
Print-ISBN 978-3-8376-4519-4
PDF-ISBN 978-3-8394-4519-8
notanatlas.org

Except where otherwise noted, this work is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 (BY) license, which means that the text may be
remixed, transformed and built upon and be copied and redistributed in
any medium or format even commercially, provided credit is given
to the author. For details go to creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Creative Commons license terms for re-use may not apply to any content
(such as graphs, figures, photos, excerpts, etc.) not original to the Open
Access publication and further permission may be required from the rights
holder. The obligation to research and clear permission lies solely with
the party re-using the material.
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication
in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available in the Internet at
http://dnb.d-nb.de
Supported by ASA FF e.V. and transforMap.
Sponsored by the Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung with funds of the Federal
Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development of the Federal Republic of Germany. This publication or parts of it can be used by others for
free as long as they provide a proper reference to the original publication.
The content of the publication is the sole responsibility of kollektiv
orangotango+ and does not necessarily reflect
a position of the Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung.

THIS
IS NOT
AN ATLAS
A GLOBAL COLLECTION
OF COUNTER-CARTOGRAPHIES
EDITED BY KOLLEKTIV ORANGOTANGO+
MADE POSSIBLE BY ROSA-LUXEMBURG-STIFTUNG

Social and Cultural Geography | Volume 26

This map shows the locations
the authors are working with,
whereas the text on the right
provides information about the
authors' locations.

Table of Contents
Introduction
12

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas
Severin Halder, Boris Michel / Berlin

26

Counter-Cartographies – The Insurrection of Maps
André Mesquita / São Paulo

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action
38

Mapping the Anti-Eviction Struggle in the San Francisco Bay Area
Anti-Eviction Map – Erin McElroy / San Francisco

46

A New Social Cartography
Defending Traditional Territories by Mapping in the Amazon
Projeto Nova Cartografia Social da Amazônia – Alfredo Wagner Berno de
Almeida, Sheilla Borges Dourado, Carolina Bertolini / Manaus & São Luis

54

A View from Above – Balloon Mapping Bourj Al Shamali
Claudia Martinez Mansell, Mustapha Dakhloul, Firas Ismail / New York &
Bourj Al Shamali

60

Mapping Safe Passages
Real-Time Interventions at the Maritime Borders of Europe
Stephan Liebscher, Ina Fisher / Berlin

66

Militarization of Rio de Janeiro's Favelas – Measuring Impacts on the
Lives of Young Black Men and Women through Social Cartography
Fórum de Juventudes do Rio de Janeiro / Rio de Janeiro

72

Political Action Maps
Finding your Way in Demonstrations and Protests
Kartographische Aktion / Germany

76

This Land Is Your Land
Strategies for Making the Potential Commons Visible and Actionable
596acres – Paula Z. Segal, Mara Kravitz / New York

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks
86

X-Ray of Soy Agribusiness in the Pampa and Mega-Mining in the Andes
Iconoclasistas – Julia Risler, Pablo Ares / Buenos Aires

92

Mapping Global Environmental Conflicts and Spaces of Resistance
Environmental Justice Atlas – Leah Temper / Barcelona

98

Collaborative Cartography in Defense of the Commons
Geo Communes / Mexico

102

Knitted Flood Wall
Martina O’Brien / Dublin

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure
110

Indigenous Cartography in Acre – Influencing Public Policy in Brazil
Comissão Pró-Índio do Acre – Renato Antonio Gavazzi / Rio Branco

116

Making Cartographies of Ourselves
CRAC Valparaiso – Paulina E. Varas, José Llano Loyola / Valparaiso

120

A Civic Mapping Project in an Indian Megacity
The Uses and Challenges of Spatial Data for Critical Research
Hyderabad Urban Lab – Harsha Devulapalli,
Indivar Jonnalagadda / Hyderabad

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure (continued)
126

Mapping Sexual Harassment in Egypt
HarassMap / Cairo

130

Untangling the Strategies of Capital – Towards a Critical Atlas of Ecuador
Colectivo de Geografía Crítica del Ecuador / Quito

136

A Students' Map for a Students' Building
Working from within and beyond the Map
Geoide en Revolución / Buenos Aires

Counter-Cartography Is Education
144

Counter-Mapping for Resistance and Solidarity in the Philippines
Between Art, Pedagogy and Community
Arnisson Andre C. Ortega, Ma. Simeona M. Martinez, Cian Dayrit,
Kristian Karlo C. Saguin / Quezon City & Pasig City

152

Mapping Inside (and Outside) the Classroom
Nicolás Frank, Fernanda García / Uruguay

158

Protest Map, Cartoon and Propaganda
The Hidden Object Map Right to the City
Marc Amann, Markus Wende / Tübingen & Berlin

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer
165

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design with GPS
Denis Wood, John Krygier / Raleigh & Delaware

183

Manual of Collective Mapping
Iconoclasistas – Julia Risler, Pablo Ares / Buenos Aires

205

A Guideline for Solidary Mapping
Anna Hirschmann, Raphael Kiczka, Florian Ledermann,
participants of the Solidary Mapping Workshop / Vienna

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility
212

Counter-Mapping Militant Research
Counter Cartographies Collective – Liz Mason-Deese, Craig Dalton, Nathan
Swanson, Tim Stallmann, Maribel Casas-Cortes, Sebastian Cobarrubias /
North Carolina

222

Mapping the Squatting Movement
Pappsatt-Kollektiv – Tobias Morawski / Berlin

228

Emancipatory Mapmaking – Lessons from Kibera
Erica Hagen, Julian Stenmanns, Till Straube / Washington D.C. & Frankfurt

234

Mapping Postkolonial
An Archive of Post/Colonial Traces, Layers and Spectres in Munich
mapping.postkolonial.net – Eva Bahl, Simon Goeke, Zara Pfeiffer,
Peter Spillmann, Michael Vögeli, Philip Zölls / Munich

240

Open-Source Aerial Imagery as a Critique Tool
The Extractive Geopolitics Project
Imaginando Buenas / Montevideo

244

You Must Buy before You Can Fly – The Airport Malls
Philippe Rekacewicz / Eydehavn

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity
252

Visualizing the Counter-Narratives of Port Said
An Experiment of Mapping Social History
Nermin Elsherif / Cairo

258

Counter-Cartographies of Exile
Sarah Mekdjian, Anne-Laure Amilhat Szary / Grenoble

264

The Materiality Language of Cartography
Textile Maps of Morrocan Working-Class Neighbourhood in Marrakech
Elise Olmedo / Marseille

270

Imaging Homelessness in a City of Care
Participatory Mapping with Homeless People
Oliver Moss, Adele Irving / NewcastleGateshead

276

Tyneside's Skateworlds and Their Transformation – Production and
Consumption of Participatory Post-Representational Cartographies
Jon Swords, Mike Jeffries / Newcastle

282

Far Rock – AnneMarie's Mental Map of New York
Aaron Reiss / San Francisco

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection
286

Information Overload – From the Map to the Ground and Back
Elisa T. Bertuzzo, Günter Nest / Berlin

294

C/Artographies of Positionality –
Or How We Try to Situate Ourselves as a Working Group in Academia
Working Group Critical Geographies of Global Inequalities / Hamburg

300

Deep Maps
Brett Bloom / Chicago

Counter-Cartographies as Critique
308

Uneven Digital Geographies … and Why They Matter
Mark Graham, Stefano De Sabbata, Ralph Straumann, Sanna Ojanperä /
London, Leicester, Oxford, Zürich

316

From Data Commons to (Critical) Cartography –
Linking Data Sources for a Gender Street Map
Florian Ledermann / Vienna

322

Towards unMaking maps – A Guide to Experiments in Paracartography
John Krygier, Denis Wood / Raleigh & Delaware

This Is Not a Conclusion
328

Discussing Counter-Cartographies
with Denis Wood, Iconoclasistas, Andre Mesquita, Francis Harvey,
Lize Mogel, Counter Cartographies Collective and Felipe Martín Novoa

339

Glossary

Introduction

11

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas
Severin Halder, Boris Michel

Ever since the first map collections of the late 16th century carried the word "Atlas" on their covers, the notion of an "Atlas"
has come with a promise: to show the world as it really is, and to
produce true knowledge about the surface of the earth1. But as
we know, truth and knowledge are deeply linked to power and
hegemony. It is no coincidence to find the Atlas Minor (see illustration bottom left), compiled by the Flemish cartographer Gerardus Mercator in the early 17th century, being decorated with
two white men surveying the world (sporting massive beards)2.
In turn, their object of interest – the globe – rests on the shoulders of Atlas, the Greek titan, and is surrounded by various religious and mythological symbols as well as fragments of ancient
architecture. This mobilization of the power of scientific, religious and worldly authorities is characteristic for the rhetoric of
maps and atlases.
Over time, atlases have changed: From being rare artefacts
in the possession of the rich and powerful they have turned into
everyday objects. With the rise of modern nation states and the
establishment of geography as a school subject in the 19th century,
school atlases have not only taught pupils how to read maps but
also how to place themselves in the world as citizens-to-be. For
this, the school atlas often deals with one's own nation first, cartographically exploring it with great diligence. Only after the "own"
spaces have been dealt with, the "rest" can be understood, but often in less detail. This order fundamentally affects young people's
worldviews. Supported by the authority and the resources of the
state, the market and science, atlases do not only reproduce these
dominant actors' worldviews, they also produce realities – such
as the idea that the world is the sum of spatially distinct nation
states and that this distinction is the natural order of things3. Atlases usually appear as very thick books declaring to present a more
or less complete description of the world and claiming to show
things as – and especially where – they really are. In other words,
atlases proclaim truth, neutrality and objectivity and consequently
invoke authority and gravitas. Therefore, atlases and maps rarely
allow for ambivalence or contradiction. This can be advantageous
when navigating home, for example. But as John Pickles reminds
us it can also be dangerous:
"The lack of cartographic 'buts' and 'ifs' gave the cartographer
'much less leeway' to remind the map-reader of the interpretative
nature of the mapping process, and, as a result, the map-reader
easily falls into the habit of seeing 'the map as a precise portrayal
of reality'." (2004: 35)

12

Introduction

Not an Atlas?

We do not claim to present an all-encompassing, true-to-scale,
and objective view of the world with the collection of maps, that
are published in this book. Rather we follow the idea that maps are
by no means just representations of reality. Maps articulate statements that are shaped by social relations, discourses and practices, but these statements also influence them in turn. Hence, maps
(and atlases) are always political. "In this interplay between facts
and perception, the cartographer is both witness and actor. […] In
order to create, or, more accurately: to invent, "his worlds", he finally arrives at a subtle mixture of the world as it is, and the world
he desires" (Rekacewicz 2006). Thus, many of the maps presented
in this volume are full of "ifs", "buts" and question marks but also
of desired worlds.
For some time now, we can witness a growing presence and
relevance of maps in art, activism and social movements. This
certainly goes hand in hand with new ways of producing, distributing and using maps that lend new weight to them as a medium
for communication. Never has it been easier to design and to publish maps online or on paper, even without formal cartographic
training. Maps are probably more present in many people's everyday life than ever before. Many critical cartographers are delighted to find the old and institutionalized cartography of universities, publishing houses and the state lose its exclusive power
over maps:
"Cartography Is Dead (Thank God!) Let's admit it. Cartography
is dead. And then let's thank our lucky stars that after the better
part of a century mapmaking is freeing itself from the dead hand
of academia." (Wood 2003: 4)
Freed from academia's dead hand, more and more radicals and
activists use maps as tools for their struggles – be it to protect indigenous territories, to visualize spatial injustices, or to organize
protest and resistance. These new, diverse practices and styles of
using maps for political and emancipatory means, and the political
processes and social forces they contain, were the starting point
for this collection of maps we do not call an atlas. We chose to call
it Not-an-Atlas because we wanted to break with the conventions
of traditional atlases. At the same time we wanted to build on other counter-atlases. This contradiction gave us the feeling of being
on the right track. We wanted to be clear about what we do not
want to be. At the same time we wanted to show respect to our
sources of inspiration.4

The Three Cs: Critical, Counter and Cartography

For us, critical cartography is an opportunity to critically work
with maps. The – mostly academic – debate of this name emerged
in the late 1980s. In the beginning it focused to a large degree on
criticizing maps or, more accurately, on the work done within
the discipline of cartography. Cartography, in this sense, refers
to a practice strongly institutionalized by the state and by capital.
The resulting critique uncovers how maps were complicit in the
history of colonialism and nationalism and how they contributed to their stabilization and legitimization. It also traced how
maps make social conditions appear natural by connecting them
to space. Cartography does not exist outside of power structures,
and maps can be powerful devices in society. Not only do they locate and thereby spatialize the natural environment, they also put
ownership, rights and social norms in their place.
Critical cartographers therefore critically scrutinized maps in
various ways – both methodologically and theoretically – using
semiotics, discourse analysis or deconstructivism. This approach
is represented most notably by John Brian Harley's Deconstructing the Map (1989) and Denis Wood's The Power of Maps (1992),
in which it is argued that maps should be understood as signs and
texts and, by being signs and texts, they should be read critically.
This made many critical geographers and others skeptical regarding the use of maps as tools for the production and visualization of geographic knowledge. Critical geographers and other
critical academics, it seemed, did not make maps anymore, as they
were quickly labeled to be reductionist, reifying social relations
and, accordingly, would be seen as "uncritical". They were frequently considered instruments of positivism as well as of technocratic thought and planning. Against this notion, other critical
geographers began to call for Reclaiming the Map (Dodge & Perkins
2008). Jeremy Crampton and John Krygier argue to conceive of
"critical cartography as a one-two punch of new mapping practices
and theoretical critique" (2005: 11). With Not-an-Atlas we intend
to follow this call. At the same time, we build upon a long tradition
of counter-cartographies – or, rather, multiple traditions in a range
of fields, such as the arts, academia or political activism. We understand counter-cartography as a political practice of mapping back.
It was especially artists who initiated the use of maps to criticize, provoke and challenge our ways of thinking about space,
place and maps. Examples include the surrealist world map of
1929, or Joaquín Torres' America Invertida (see illustration on
opposite page top) with its slogan "Our North is the South" from
1943 – both of which subvert the hegemonic, Eurocentric view of
our world. This did not only aim at questioning familiar imagi-

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas

13

nations of the world. Quite often, it was also about challenging
the aesthetic customs and boundaries of what actually counts as a
map. Just as Lewis Carroll has the bellmen of his 1876 poem "The
Hunting of the Snark" (Carroll 1876: 17) present the "perfect and
absolute blank" map (see illustration on opposite page) to his crew:
"What's the good of Mercator's North Poles and Equators,
Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?"
So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
"They are merely conventional signs!
"Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
But we've got our brave Captain to thank
(So the crew would protest) "that he's bought us the best –
A perfect and absolute blank!"
Milestones for the fusion of art maps and counter-cartography are,
among others, the works of Öyvind Fahlström (since the 1970s)
and Mark Lombardi (1990s) (see article page 26). These artists notably contributed to the new wave of counter-cartographies that
emerged with the new millennium. They included, for example,
the Bureau d'Études (see article page 26) and hackitectura.net5.
Currently, the Argentinian art and research duo Iconoclasistas
plays a major role in the dissemination of counter-cartographies.

14

Introduction

Accordingly, they are one of our central sources of inspiration
(see second map at the end of the editorial and articles pages 86
& 183). They in turn are influenced by indigenous drawing traditions of Latin America as well as Gerd Arntz's and Otto Neurath's
pictograms and mappings. Arntz's and Neurath's work does not
only influence present day graphic design. In its core, it was also
a project of developing a revolutionary and internationalist tool
for communication (Neurath 1933) (see illustration below and on
following spread left).
The social and political conflicts around land and place between Patagonia and Alaska actually seem to be a particularly
fertile ground for this kind of combination of art, activism and
counter-cartography, as groups like the Counter Cartographies
Collective (see articles pages 26 & 212), Arte Callejero6 or the Beehive Collective (see first map at the end of the editorial) impressively indicate.
Counter-maps also grow from a long tradition of post-colonial
practices of mapping back. These practices can be traced back to
the struggles of First Nations political organizations in Canada
and Alaska in the 1970s. The idea behind indigenous counter-cartography is as simple as it is good: "More indigenous territory has
been claimed by maps than by guns. This assertion has its corollary: more indigenous territory can be reclaimed and defended

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas

15

by maps than by guns" (Nietschmann 1995: 37). The mapping of
indigenous biographies played a crucial part in the First Nations
campaigns for autonomy in the North of the Americas. This was
eventually successful: not only did it lead to the establishment of
Nunavut, a self-governed Inuit territory of two million square
kilometers in northern Canada (see illustration on opposite page
top); it also initiated a spreading of indigenous counter-mappings
all over the world7 (see articles pages 46, 110, 130 & 144). Mapping
struggles for indigenous territories and rights are a central chapter in the history of counter-cartography. Even the term "counter-mapping"8 was coined by Nancy Lee Peluso (1995) working
with the Dayak in Indonesia, using maps for (re)claiming their
land.
Beyond appropriating western map practices for indigenous
purposes, however, there have always been other forms of spatial
representation – incongruent with western cartography. Some Aztec codices could be seen as an example of these (see illustrations
on opposite page bottom). At times, these geographies of words
and images, songs or handicraft even merged with colonial maps,
as in the case of Tupaia's map9 (see illustration this page right).

Just by the simple fact of their existence, indigenous geographic
representations challenge dominant cartographic imaginations
and methods that exclude all non-European modes of knowledge
and representation. By reflecting dominant notions of territoriality and shedding light on different human-space interactions,
indigenous cartography serves as inspiration for non-hegemonic
worldviews and emancipatory practices.
At the same time, indigenous counter-mappings often contain a paradoxical element: In order to be heard and recognized,
the claim for territory and empowerment has to translate indigenous cosmovisions into dominant cartographic tools. Hence,
there is always the danger of distorting original messages or
intentions, and to become instrumentalized by those in power.
Precisely because maps are powerful tools, it is necessary to keep
questioning and reinterpreting them in order to make sure they
are still useful for emancipatory purposes.
"The fact that groups across the political spectrum create these
sorts of maps illustrates that counter-mapping itself is not necessarily politically progressive, but that geographical imaginations are important sites of struggle." (Wood cited from Counter
Cartographies Collective, Dalton & Mason-Desee, 2012: 443)
When dealing with geographical imaginations in an emancipatory
way, William Bunge's work is an important reference (especially for us as geographers). His geography from below emerged in
Detroit's periphery and aimed at building cartographic tools for
marginalized communities. This type of counter-cartographic
culture utilizes simple and vivid cartographic language in order to
promote geographical alphabetization10 and the self-determination of local communities (see illustration on following spread).
Today the battle over geographical imaginations is very much
alive and well. In that sense, Not-an-Atlas is our contribution to
this contested practice. At the same time, it is necessary to stress
that counter-cartographies can only be "a departure point or a tool
that can aid in analysis but do not speak for themselves" (Paglen
2007: 43): the map can never be the territory (see article page 86)
and the struggles will not be decided on paper.

16

Introduction

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas

17

This Is a Global Collection
of Counter-Cartographies

The current panorama of counter-cartographies is as diverse as the
roots of critical mapping. Accordingly, Not-an-Atlas collects a very
broad range of different contributions, originating from various
contexts, and utilizing diverse methods of creation and presentation. Our aim is not to tell a coherent story of counter-cartography,
or to provide a simple template for critical mapping. Rather, we
would like to give an impression of how open and diverse the field
has become, especially due to the practices of people without formal
cartographic training. However, with Not-an-Atlas we do not only
intend to show but also to contribute to this opening up of actors,
topics and forms of map-making. We would like to give space to
counter-hegemonic worldviews and at the same time hope to support practices of resistance. And we intend to inspire you to pick
up this practical, powerful tool – without losing sight of its pitfalls.
Not-an-Atlas deals with counter-cartographies from different
contexts and regions, with maps that were produced for various
reasons with a wide range of techniques, practices and people.
These counter-cartographies largely exist beyond the traditional
spheres of cartography, and in most cases their creators are primarily activists, critical educators, militant researchers, artists
and/or part of social movements. They see mapping as a means to
an end: They map for a cause.
To get some form of order into this heterogeneous field, which
at the same time challenges order, we tried to cluster the maps of
Not-an-Atlas into chapters – a challenging task. There could have
been other chapters. At the end we decided to group the maps and
projects around their causes and motivations even if most of the
maps have more than just one reason to exist. After defining the
chapters, we ordered the maps within them, as far as possible,
from concrete "maps" to abstract "mappings".
In the first chapter the maps are used as a Tool for Action, to
directly change the space around us. In the second chapter maps

18

Introduction

are used to Tie Networks for fostering dialogue and exchange
among them. In the third chapter maps serve to uncover social
problems and to Create Political Pressure. In the fourth chapter
Counter-Cartography is Education: maps can be part of critical
educational work, not only serving to criticize hegemonic cartographic images, but also as an invitation to Become an Occasional
Cartographer through self-organized mapping processes as can
be seen in the fifth chapter. As chapter six shows, counter-cartographies Create Visibility for "invisible" groups and processes,
breaking the cartographic silence. In chapter seven counter-maps
Show Spatial Subjectivity, empowering people to visualize their
personal geographies and perceptions of space. This goes hand
in hand with their potential to initiate and support processes
of Self-Reflection shown in chapter eight. In the final chapter,
counter-cartographies articulate Critique of society, of dominant
cartographic imaginations and of critical maps themselves. The
collection in your hands wants to reflect these various approaches
and aims.
Not-an-Atlas focuses on discussing the practical aspects of
mapping projects. This includes not only a presentation of various
methods and techniques for creating maps, but also an exploration of different political topics and regional contexts in which
maps matter. It becomes clear that a convergence of critical-cartographic and political actors can lead to productive interactions.
Not-an-Atlas understands itself as colorful panorama, displaying
the range of possibilities for using critical maps for political struggles and emancipatory education. Not-an-Atlas seeks to inspire,
to document the under-represented and to be a useful companion
when becoming a counter-cartographer oneself. This is how we
would like to encourage a critical reflection of dominant spatial
imaginations. We want to support social struggles by presenting
maps as a useful tool for these struggles.

How to Edit and Reflect Counter-Cartographies
Collectively as Activists and Academics?

Both our activist experiences with collective and critical mapping
workshops as kollektiv orangotango11 as well as our individual and
academic engagements with maps served as starting points for
Not-an-Atlas. In the spring of 2015 we released a Call for Maps
in English, German and Spanish, inviting everyone engaged with
practices of critical mapping to send us ideas, texts, photos and,
of course, maps. We were overwhelmed by the resonance! Nearly
150 submissions found their way to us. Some of them came from
places, struggles and activists we had not heard of before; others came from long-time companions and friends. Among them
were contributions from well-known critical cartographers, activists, and social movements who have been working with maps
for many years; but even more emerging mapmakers sent us their
proposals. What followed were exciting three years of discussing,
selecting and editing the various maps and projects. Again and
again we had to ask ourselves: What actually makes a map (not)
critical? And what do we (not) have in mind when working on a
counter-atlas? We also had to continually negotiate between more
activist and more academic modes of knowledge production – be
it in regards to the content of the maps or in regards to our own
mode of working and living. With the large number of submissions, Not-an-Atlas quickly outgrew its initial frame in terms of
involved languages, time and resources. The resulting process of
collective learning therefore included various challenges, personal
fluctuations and surprises.
The exciting insights we were able to gather regarding various
processes connected to mapping and resistance, as well as growing
as a network, are the fruits of this labor. With Not-an-Atlas, we
hope to strengthen and to contribute to this kind of processes and
networks in analog and digital ways (see notanatlas.org).
The following 330 pages aim to inspire current debates about
maps, and to promote counter-mapping practices. Not-an-Atlas wants to contribute to emancipatory transformations on the
ground by supporting counter-cartographies within and beyond
these pages. Finally – and maybe most importantly – we see this
book as a guide pointing at many possible worlds, and as an invitation to create more of them: on paper, online and in space.

P.S. Kollektiv orangotango+ would like to thank those who supported and accompanied us during this journey: Special thanks
go out to Christian Bittner, Matze Jung, Dirk Neumann and Verena Schreiber, who helped to put this project on track. We want
to express special thanks to Steffen Kühne from the Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung, Christa Müller from anstiftung, Karin Werner
from transcript, Jens Marquardt from ASA FF e.V. and Markus
Mender from Le Monde Diplomatique for their support and
trust. We want to give shout-outs to Sebastian Hilf from kollektiv orangotango, Cornelius Sutter from Nachbarschaftshaus Urbanstraße e.V., Handlungsspielraum Berlin, Jon Richter from
TransforMap, the Jugendbildungsnetzwerk of the Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung, Jonathan Wright and Carla Guerrón-Montero for
providing practical help when we needed it. We also thank our fellow counter-mappers Julia Risler and Pablo Ares from Iconoclasistas, Tim Stallmann from the Counter Cartographies Collective
and countless critical cartographers and geographers who guided
us throughout the last decade. Last but not least, we want to show
our respect to all the social movements, activists and academics
gathered in this book. Without your daily struggles this Not-anAtlas would be pointless.

Special thanks to Laurenz Virchow, Karl Heyer and Philip Boos
for their help with editing and translating this text.

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas

19

Endnotes
1. In its German edition the Atlas Minor is a “short but thorough description of the entire world and all of its parts” (Mercator, 1651).
2. At this point it should not be concealed that the authors of this text are
white European males as well, one of which is also bearded. This is why
we would like to distance ourselves as much as possible from the claim
of being able to measure out the world of counter-cartographies since
this would be presumptuous. We seek to trade assumed objectivity and
mathematical precision for respect and modesty towards all actors who
take care of their daily territories by defending them against destruction,
capitalism, colonialism, nationalism, racism, sexism – also with the help of
maps.
3. Maps are powerful since they are not only a product of societal structures but also a producer of social realities. Maps do not only represent
realities by building symbolic orders and hierarchies; they also create
realities while being part of the interaction between people and their
environments (Pickles, 2004).
4. This is why we would like to refer to atlases, which break with the
traditional image of an atlas, for example: An Atlas of Radical Cartography (Mogel & Bhagat, 2007), Everything sings: Maps for a Narrative
Atlas (Wood, 2010), The Nuclear War Atlas (Bunge, 1982), Atlas der
Globalisierung (Le Monde Diplomatique 2003-2015), The Nunavut Atlas
(Riewe, 1992), The Maya Atlas (Toledo Maya Cultural Council, 1997),
Food: An Atlas (Jensen & Roy, 2012), We Are Here Map Archive (see
mapsarchive.wordpress.com) and antiAtlas of Borders (see antiatlas.
net). So even if we consider Not-An-Atlas to be a counter-atlas, it is not
the counter-atlas. “Rather, it is one of many possible atlases, given the
abundance of artists, architects, and others using maps and mapping in
their work” (Mogel & Bhagat, 2007: 6).
5. Hackitectura (2002-2011) was a group of architects, programmers,
artists and activists. In their work, they created a fusion of theoretical
research with emerging territories of physical and digital movements.
Their famous counter-cartography of the Straits of Gibraltar draws an
alternative image of the Moroccan-Spanish border. The map shows the
existing networks and flows of migration, communication and capital in
in a heavily monitored border region with the idea to reshape it (see
hackitectura.net).
6. The Argentinian Grupo de Arte Callejero is composed of artists,
photographers and designers. They work closely with social movements
like H.I.J.O.S (an organization created by the children of the victims of
the military dictatorship). With their series of maps Aqui Viven Genocidas
(2001-2006) the Grupo de Arte Callejero actively participated in the
escraches, which translates into acts of public shaming to condemn the
injustice, violence and genocides committed during the military dictatorship (see grupodeartecallejero.wordpress.com).
7. Some examples for relevant indigenous mapping projects and groups
from different regions are The Nunavut Atlas (Riewe, 1992), The Maya
Atlas (Toledo Maya Cultural Council, 1997), Aboriginal Mapping Network (nativemaps.org) and Nova Cartografia Social da Amazonia (see
article page 46). It seems that China is the only region around the world
with an indigenous population but without an indigenous counter-mapping culture (Rundstrom, 2009: 316).

20

Introduction

8.

In the meantime a lot of different concepts that have been interlinked
with other counter-cartography besides counter-mapping, such as
alternative cartography, bioregional mapping, collective mapping, community mapping, counter-hegemonic mapping, ethno cartography, ethno
mapping, green mapping, mapping back, participatory rural appraisal,
public participation geographic information system, (public) participatory mapping, radical cartography, subversive mapping and remapping.
9. In 1769 the legendary Polynesian sailor Tupaia, son of a preacher family
from Raiatea, accompanied James Cook on the Endeavour and drew
the cartographic representation of the region Pacific islands (Eckstein
& Schwarz 2015). Tupaia’s chart of 74 islands can be seen as a fusion of
Oceanic geographical imaginations like star compasses with European
cartography. Di Piazza and Pearthree (2007) propose such a reading
for Tupaia’s drawing. “Tupaia’s chart, while having the appearance of a
map, is in fact a mosaic of sailing directions or plotting diagrams drawn
on paper, similar to those made by master navigators tracing lines in the
sand or arranging pebbles on a mat to instruct their pupils” (Di Piazza &
Pearthree, 2007: 321). This means that Tupaia was applying a cartographic technique with the center point or island of departure as a “subjective
coordinate”. This geographical imagination contrasts with the coordinates in Cartesian space where islands are defined absolutely and not in
relation to the navigator (Di Piazza & Pearthree, 2007: 326).
10. The term alphabetization is used by Paulo Freire in his Pedagogy of the
Oppressed (1968) to describe an emancipatory learning process. As
kollektiv orangotango, we see our own collective mapping practice as
a continuation of the popular education of Freire and Bunge and as a
collective process of geographical alphabetization in spaces of everyday
action (Halder, 2018: 308).
11. Kollektiv orangotango was founded in 2008. Since then it has been
constantly developing through a network of critical geographers, friends
and activists who deal with questions regarding space, power and resistance. With our geographical activism, we seek to support processes
and oppositional actors who instigate social change by prefiguring social
alternatives. We conduct emancipatory educational work as well as concrete political and artistic interventions. These are supposed to enforce
reflections on and changes of social conditions. Since 2010 we have
been engaged in processes of collective and critical mapping within the
fields of right to the city, (urban) agriculture, critical pedagogy, alternative housing and solidarity economy, mostly in Europe and also in Latin
America. But kollektiv orangotango also functions as a platform for different actions. In the case of Not-an-Atlas, its publication was realized by
kollektiv orangotango in cooperation with other activists and academics.
That is the reason why it was named kollektiv orangotango+.

References
Bunge, W. 1988. The Nuclear War Atlas. New York: Blackwell.
Caroll, L. 1876. The Hunting of the Snark. London: Macmillan.
Counter Cartographies Collective, Dalton, C. & Mason-Deese, L. 2012.
Counter (Mapping) Actions: Mapping As Militant Research. ACME: An
International Journal for Critical Geographies, 11 (3): 439-66.
Crampton, J. & Krygier, J. 2005. An Introduction to Critical Cartography. ACME:
An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies, 4 (1): 11-33.
Di Piazza, A. & Pearthree, E. 2007. A new reading of Tupaia’s chart. Journal of
the Polynesian Society. 116 (3): 321-340.
Dodge, M. & Perkins, C. 2008. Reclaiming the Map. Environment and Planning,
40: 1271-1276
Eckstein, L. & Schwarz, A. 2015. Tupaias Karte – Die polynesische Kunst
der Navigation. Le Monde Diplomatique, monde-diplomatique.de/artikel/!5227784, 3 July 2018.
Freire, P. 1968. Pedagogia do Oprimido. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra.
Halder, S. 2018. Gemeinsam die Hände dreckig machen – Aktionsforschungen
im aktivistischen Kontext urbaner Gärten und kollektiver Kartierungen.
Bielefeld: transcript.
Harley, J. B. 1989. Deconstructing the Map. Cartographica, 26 (2): 1-20.
Jensen, D. & Roy, M. eds. 2012. Food: An Atlas. Oakland: Guerrilla Cartography.
Le Monde Diplomatique 2003-2015. Atlas der Globalisierung.
Mercator, G. 1651. Atlas minor, das ist eine kurze jedoch grundliche Beschreibung
der gantzen Weldt. Amsterdam: Joannes Janssonius
Mogel, L. & Bhagat, A. eds. 2007. An atlas of radical cartography. Los Angeles:
Journal of Aesthetics & Protest Press.
Neurath, O. 1933. Bildstatistik nach Wiener Methode in der Schule. Wien:
Deutscher Verlag für Jugend und Volk.
Nietschmann, B. 1995. Defending the Miskito Reefs with Maps and GIS.
Mapping With Sail, Scuba, and Satelite. Cultural Survival Quarterly, 18 (4):
34-37.
Paglen T. 2007. Mapping Ghosts. Visible collective talks to Trevor Paglen. In:
Mogel, L. & Bhagat, A. eds., An Atlas of Radical Cartography: 39-50. Los
Angeles: Journal of Aesthetics & Protest Press.
Peluso, N. L. 1995. Whose woods are these? Counter-Mapping Forest Territories in Kalimantan, Indonesia. Antipode, 27 (4): 383-406.
Pickles, J. 2004. A History of Space. Cartographic Reason, Mapping and the
Geo-coded World. London: Routledge.
Rekacewicz, P. 2006. Der Kartograph und seine Welten. Le Monde Diplomatique, monde-diplomatique.de/artikel/!377853#anker1, 3 July 2018.
Riewe, R. 1992. Nunavut Atlas. Edmonton: Canadian Circumpolar Institute.
Rundstrom, R. 2009. Counter-Mapping. International Encyclopaedia of Human
Geography: 314-318. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Toledo Maya Cultural Council 1997. Maya Atlas - The Struggle to Preserve
Maya Land in Southern Belize. Berkley: North Atlantic Books.
Wood, D. 2010. Everything Sings: Maps for a Narrative Atlas. Los Angeles: Siglio
Press.
Wood, D. 2003. Cartography is Dead (Thank God!). Cartographic Perspectives,
45: 4-7.
Wood, D. 1992. The Power of Maps. New York: Guilford.

Illustrations
page 12 top: Joaquín Torres, America Invertida, 1943, Museo Juan Manuel
Blanes, Montevideo, Public Domain (according the Uruguayan Law)
page 12 bottom: Gerhard Mercator & Jodocus Hondius, Cover of the Mercator-Hondius Atlas Minor, 1607, Statens kartverk Sjø, Public Domain
page 14: Otto Neurath & Gerd Arntz, Kaffee-, Kakao- Teewirtschaft der Erde,
Gesellschaft und Wirtschaft - Bildstatistisches Elementarwerk, page 42, 1930,
all rights reserved © Österreichisches Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum
page 15: Lewis Carroll, Ocean-Chart, The Hunting of the Snark, 1876/1931,
Macmillan, Public Domain
page 16 left: Otto Neurath & Gerd Arntz, Religionen der Erde, Gesellschaft
und Wirtschaft - Bildstatistisches Elementarwerk, page 98, 1930, all rights
reserved © Österreichisches Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum
page 16 right: Tupaia, Detail of Raiatea from Tupaia’s Chart, Indigenous intermediaries: New perspectives on exploration archives, page 151, circa 1769, all
rights reserved British Library, BL Add Ms 21519 © British Library Board
page 17 top: Rick Riewe, Nunavut Atlas, page 43 (wildlife overlay), 1992,
The University of Alberta Press & Tungavik Federation of Nunavut, all rights
reserved © Canadian Circumpolar Institute
page 17 bottom: unknown author, Codex Borgia / Codex Yoalli Ehēcatl , page
44 & 36, pre-Columbian era/1898, FAMSI, Public Domain
“Pages 29 through 46 of the codex constitute the longest section of the
codex, and the most enigmatic. The pages refer to different veintena festivals.
Together these images represent a 20-day period for the veintena cycle. The
glyphs refer to dry and rainy seasons. They apparently show a journey but the
complex iconography and the lack of any comparable document have led to
a variety of interpretations ranging from an account of actual astronomical
and historical events, to the passage of Quetzalcoatl – as a personification of
Venus —through the underworld, to a “cosmic narrative of creation”.
(en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Borgia)
page 18: William Bunge, Children’s Automobile “Accidents” in Detroit, Nuclear War Atlas, 1988, Basil Blackwell, licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) Unported
License, Cornell University – PJ Mode Collection of Persuasive Cartography.
“This map suggests that the high rate of injury of inner-city Detroit school
children by automobiles shouldn’t really be attributed to ‘accident’, but to
the callousness of officials who allow dangerous conditions to persist in
‘the geography of the streets’ where the poor go to school, as opposed to
suburban ‘cul-de-sacs’. […] A 1971 version of this map was more bluntly entitled ‘Where Commuters Run Over Black Children on the Pointes-Downtown Track’.” (digital.library.cornell.edu/catalog/ss:19343514)
“A young black woman, Gwendolyn Warren, from Fitzgerald in Detroit ... was
filled with hatred towards me because I did not notice the children being
murdered by automobiles in front of their homes or children starving in front
of abundant food.” (Bunge, W. cited from Barnes, T.; Heynen, N. 2011: William
W. Bunge (1971) Fitzgerald: Geography of a Revolution. Cambridge, MA.
Schenkman Publishing Co. Progress in Human Geography, 35 (5): 712-715)
page 22-23: Beehive Design Collective, The Colonizer’s View from Mesoamérica Resiste
“With the shutters closed, the outside of the poster resembles an old
Spanish conquistador’s map of Mesoamerica. The map is a top-down look
at the region and draws parallels between colonial history and modern-day
capitalism. Outsiders who have no connection with the land have drawn this
map, with motives of extraction and profit.“
(beehivecollective.org/graphics-projects/mesoamerica-resiste/)
“The Beehive Design Collective is a wildly motivated, all-volunteer, activist
arts collective dedicated to “cross-pollinating the grassroots” by creating collaborative, anti-copyright images for use as educational and organizing tools“.
(beehivecollective.org/about-the-hive/who-we-are/)
page 24-25: Iconoclasistas, ¿A quién pertenece la tierra? / Who owns
the land? - Mapa Mundi / World Map, 2017, licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)
International Public License.

Editorial – This Is Not an Atlas

21

Counter-Cartographies

Politics, Art and the Insurrection of Maps

André Mesquita
andremesquita.redezero.org

Tracing out complex systems. Comprehending conflicts, networks, territories, borders and situations which were previously
invisible. Sharing techniques and new technologies. Producing
autonomous knowledge. These are some of the strategies that
characterize the practices of critical cartography. Up to which
point do these maps succeed in going beyond conventional maps,
opposing impartial representations and objectives followed by
corporative, military and governmental interests? In which way
can arts and activism employed by cartographers and insurgent
artists contest these dominant powers? What are the possibilities
for participating in these movements?
We might be used to thinking that maps are exact representations of reality. But neither does neutrality exist in the production
of maps nor does it exist in their use. In the hands of capitalism
and its institutions, mappings have been instrumentalized in many
ways: for installing order and executing domination of colonizers
over the colonized, for consolidating economic blocks, for justifying private control over public spaces, for legitimizing borders, for
exploiting natural resources and common goods. Yet the proposition I want to discuss here is the following: parting from their history as instruments of domination, maps can also be transformed
and thus used by the hands of those who resist state control and
capitalist domination. This transformation becomes possible due
to the fact that cartography – as the discipline of the creation of
maps as well as the study and reflection of their political and social
role – suffered from a substantial change in the twentieth century,
in that it was and still continues to be widely subverted by artists
and activists. This contribution elaborates on some examples of
artists and collectives that promoted this change. I will explore
their struggles to position themselves in the capitalist art world
and point out the renewed relevance of counter-cartographies.
The resistance against capital's cooptation of culture calls for
the production of new radical imaginaries, spaces of political autonomy and shared invention. This is also the case for the regulation of the forces of cooperation which tend to be captured, absorbed, and neutralized by corporative, military and commercial
mechanisms. It also calls for the elaboration of conceptual and
analytical tools that enable the visualization of the ever more sophisticated structures of capitalism which provoke new situations
of opposition and political engagement. Mappings realized by
collectives of art activism – such as the Bureau d'Études (France)1,
the Counter-Cartographies Collective (United States)2 (see article
page 212), Iconoclasistas (Argentina)3 (see articles pages 86 & 183)
and many others presented in Not-an-Atlas – are examples of open
and process-oriented tools proposing to map regional and global

26

Introduction

flows of power systems, monopolies and administrative networks.
The maps of these collectives give us an idea about which forms of
counter-power we need to create and what social struggles are, as
they are much more than mere representations. In order to create
counter-cartographies, their practices invert sovereignty of a cartography of control. And, in fact, these maps can also be seen as
starting points for subversive actions.

Making Domination Visible

In this contribution counter-cartographies are understood as
maps that break with the scientific tradition and specialization of
cartography as well as with its mere technical or essentially positivist view of the world. This type of transgression goes against
official geopolitical maps while exposing relations of domination
over and exploitation of a territory as well as revealing concealed
networks of power. With an anti-capitalist orientation, one of the
aims of counter-maps is to make obscure and established powers
more perceptible in order to confront them. Counter-cartographies can be used in a tactical manner over the duration of an action and in a strategical manner for analyzing networks and spaces
in order to generate social change from below. Another task is to
deconstruct the political and economic logics of mechanisms, organizations and social hierarchies so as to reveal its contradictions.
This type of experiment also makes arts political, not only due to
the approach of a "political issue", but because its sensitive and intuitive expression is capable of enunciating the violence going on
behind the scenes.
Articulations between artistic practices, pedagogic alternatives
and militant investigations make it possible to formulate questions
concerning the experiences of counter-cartographies in relation
to protocols and dilemmas of collaborative work. While mapping
with communities and social movements, the artists/collectives
mediate a continuous process in which the act of listening, the
systematization of data as well as decisions regarding the means
to make the maps are constructed, negotiated and decided upon
collectively. Through collective mapping, the language, tools and
techniques of cartography formerly restricted to "specialists", are
socialized and reinvented. They are shared freely and thus expanded to non-conventional uses.
The transformation of cartography by practices of art activism
over the past decades has made it possible to explore alternative
models outside of the academic context and beyond purely scientific activities. This includes historical references going back to artistic vanguards at the beginning of the twentieth century (such as

Dadaism and Surrealism) as well as maps created by Situationists4,
feminist artists and groups such as Fluxus.5 One of these artists to
anticipate some of the nuances of the political practices of counter-cartographies was the Swedish-Brazilian Öyvind Fahlström
(1928-1976). He brought forward the critical necessity and revolutionary urgency for prefigurating another world as possible. This
was done by challenging the rigidity of maps which portrayed a
planet dominated by the instability of imperial power disputed between the United States and the Soviet Union.
With his World Map (1972), Fahlström confronted established
limits and dominant powers individually in order to construct a
counter-cartography as a tool for political sensitization and public indignation. The
synoptic view of
the World Map in a
collection of events
and in the narration
of short chronicles
shows the progression of political and
economic power of
North American imperialism during the
Cold War, from the
end of World War II
to the beginning of
the 1970's. Fahlström
collected and organized data referring
to different scales of
analysis on the global
economic situation,
on exploitation, repression and struggles in the so-called
"Third World". Statistics, thoughts, extracted texts and periodicals of the left as
well as historical facts were compiled, registered on color-coded
sheets and inserted into the continents of the World Map.
The world that pulsates, expands and contracts itself in the
World Map does not register an exact mapping of the physical
geography of the planet. Rather it is the quantity of information
that shapes the forms of the continents in accordance with the

intensity of their crises. Its topographic malleability suppresses, transforms and recreates institutionalized borders in order
to make space for fragments of stories. Oceans were practically
abolished and are more narrow now. Like cracks they are swallowed by the collision of territories. The de-naturalized forms
of the continents portrayed in the World Map try to support the
weight of the facts describing a planet taken by greed and violence.
Another example of how counter-cartographies of artists
can illuminate common territories between past and present
which are generally hidden by official cartography, are the "narrative structures" built by Mark Lombardi (1951-2000) (see map
this page).6 In 1994,
Lombardi decided
to give a new direction to his art work
by
systematizing
the practice of an
archivist
obsessed
with documenting a
continuous flow of
information on political, economic and
corporative powers.
Lombardi shows us
data and connections in a network
of trajectories, designed in the form of
circles and arcs that
take up great spaces
on paper. We find
appointed
identities in the names of
institutions, presidents, bankers, mafia bosses, terrorists
and soldiers cited
within small circles
that make us remember their polemical stories once shown in the
media. We are taken by a disconcerting reality seeing individuals connected to wars, drug trafficking and crimes. An interlaced
swarming of the financial and corporative world emerges with
multiple causalities. Exorbitant numbers link individuals and
companies through dashed lines.

Counter-Cartographies

27

Fahlström's maps were elaborated in the troubled moments of the
1970s, while Lombardi configured narrative structures during the
exponential development of global and financial networks two
decades later. Both are important historical and conceptual precedents for a posterior generation of artist-activists. Fahlström and
Lombardi worked with particular methods to manually compile
and archive precise and verifiable data on political, social and economic processes, organizing it in maps or diagrams to analyze situations of the present. Evidently, the work of these two artists has
gradually been incorporated into the permanent archives of museums, banks, galleries and collectors. As museums, collectors and
companies have turned into the contemporary guardians of these
artistic cartographies that reveal the access to power, the access to
these works is even more restricted.

Use Value and Artistic Autonomy

It is necessary to point out some escape strategies that mark the
history of artistic cartography. In the essay "Resymbolizing Machines: art after Öyvind Fahlström" the Bureau d'Études (2004)
examines how Fahlström tried to gradually leave art institutions
and gained relative autonomy through a system of alternative distributions of his maps and games. A version of the World Map
[Sketch for World Map Part 1 (Americas, Pacific)] was printed,and
distributed through a new left journal of the seventies [Liberated
Guardian] to disseminate the political content of this work and
reach a wider public (Bureau d'Études, 2004).
The Bureau d'Études uses Fahlström as a reference to examine failures and advances of artists when their projects depend on
the authority and the discourses of the art world. For example, this
may include the endorsement of curators, critics, collectors, etc.
to be legitimized or even suppressed when trying to leave this system. Investigations by the Counter-Cartographies Collective also
show that, at present, when companies, institutions and clusters
of so-called "creative industries" capture the power of inventions
of students and cultural workers, a trend to exclude these groups
from the networks of production must be observed. At the same
time there is an enormous distrust concerning the forms of expression that circulate via official channels – may those channels
be museums, governments, universities, marketing agencies or
media conglomerates.
By conducting interviews and workshops with students, the
Counter-Cartographies Collective produced a DisOrientation
Guide (2006, 2009) (see map on opposite page) on the campus of
its University of North Carolina, localized in the "Research Triangle" formed by the cities of Durham, Raleigh and Chapel Hill.
The guide shows diverse maps and diagrams connecting student
struggles in their institutions with demonstrations that have occurred in other countries. The Counter-Cartographies Collective considers that universities are not a "privileged bubble", an
"isolated space" or an "ivory tower" separated from the world but
rather a fabric that concentrates flexible work markets, knowledge
economies, corporative research, financial capitalism and gentrification. In these initiatives of counter-mapping lies a necessity to
seek not a romanticized redemption of an autonomy from society
or a repetition of gestures or formulas, that, in the best case, will
be considered as acts of institutional critique. Rather they call for

28

Introduction

the reformulation of this criticism to other disciplines regulated
by neoliberalism in the face of the production of spaces of artistic
autonomy.
In its most basic sense, autonomy signifies "self-legislation".
It is the capacity of a group, of an occupation or community to
establish its proper institutions and to self-organize according to
its agreements. The term artistic autonomy, fundamental for the
Bureau d'Études, indicates the decision of aesthetic producers to
restructure themselves in order to seek new ways of acting, prioritizing alternative experiences of publication, reception and distribution. In this sense, the maps of the Bureau d'Études (see map at
the end of the article) problematize in detail and exhaustively the
almost inaccessible links between institutions as well as known
and unknown individuals. In order to do so, they start with mapping the power concentration of corporate media, the system of
food production, global vigilance, military technologies, prisons,
financial networks and economic crises among other topics. For
this collective autonomy is a fundamental point of their existence.
They thus seek to visualize the lines of production and the resulting meanings of official systems through their maps. It is necessary to decode the capitalist machinery in order to intervene in it,
and to thereby situate insurgent strategies and actions.
In the beginning of the 2000s, the maps of the Bureau d'Études
began to serve the group as a means to orient themselves in reference to networks of control which needed to be surpassed as well
as political autonomy which needed to be created. The protests of
the Global Days of Action and the use of technological networks
by artists and social movements delineated a new topology of the
planet that needed to be understood and situated. Even more so,
since after September 11, 2001, the disproportional increase of intelligence services and private companies exploring programs of
vigilance and monitoring channels of communication needed to
be verified. The internet opened up countless possibilities to conduct critical mapping investigations of contemporary capitalism.
For these investigations the map productions and the new cognitive tools have become essential to close a gap regarding the means
of analysis. This approximates them to demonstrations and other
forms of direct action.
Artistic autonomy crosses habitual dichotomies of inside/outside of art institutions. The question to be answered by collectives
of art activism continues to be the following: how can the subordination under official institutional models be escaped and a way of
non-mediated autonomy be found? In other words, how do counter-cartographies find a political space in which to formulate their
compositions of this "outside"?
While a diagram such as Lombardi's is a unique work of art,
the works of collectives of counter-cartographies are produced
and shared like common goods in order to deepen knowledge, to
inform, to inspire and to be engaged with. An example of these
dynamics can be found in the works of the Iconoclasistas. Formed
in Buenos Aires in 2006, the Iconoclasistas have since then combined theoretical research and graphic arts in mapping workshops
with students and social movements (see second map at the end of
the previous article).
For Maribel Casas-Cortés and Sebastian Cobarrubias, members of the Counter-Cartographies Collective, maps become
more heterogeneous when they are produced in a collective way.

Through collective processes they create instances for popular
participation, its information and icons can be added more easily,
and other people can suggest different relevant data for the map.
This data may include information about a specific corporation
or a set of work relations, and it often enables the development
of new aesthetics of cognitive mapping as well as the discussion
of new issues to be mapped (see Casas-Cortés and Cobarrubias,
2007, p. 120). Collaboration and cooperation increase the complexity of the power and critical grasp of a map based upon different perceptions. Counter-cartographies are an essential element
of the repertory of the forms of artistic activism. They are one tool
within a variety of tactical actions and artistic interventions carried out in public space, each corresponding to specific situations.
Regarding the circulation and multiplication of their maps, the
Iconoclasistas, the Bureau d'Études and the Counter-Cartographies Collective count on electronic distribution of their projects

on web pages, blogs and digital communities. Printed versions can
be paid for with the budget of an exhibition or with money from
one's own pocket. This enables the map's circulation in autonomous spaces, schools, workshops, open classes and activist meetings while being distributed for free and from hand to hand. All
this permits immediate, open and unlimited public access to these
works, ascribing them a use value that cannot be achieved through
a circulation which is restricted to the spaces of galleries and museums.
Through these maps a new sense is conferred to cartography.
Cartography is not only a particularized activity or a restricted knowledge but can also be seen as a possible project that disseminates as much as possible – a type of information which was
usually related to a specific public and specific sources. These
maps result from an effort of collective intelligence offering free
knowledge to any person interested in researching them in order

Counter-Cartographies

29

to initiate their own investigations. They represent practices that
point to the fact that the moment has come to rethink the means
of production and the emergence of a political counter-history of
arts and culture (Sholette, 2011, p. 3). The work with counter-cartographies does not only reveal systems of power as it gives a new
sense to the notion of "maps producing territory". Moreover, this
territory produced by the map is multiple, not only spatial, but also
temporal and social: it extends from the place where the maps are
produced – with its stories, reports and vestiges – to the countless
situations in which they are distributed, accessed and used.

Mapping or Being Mapped

The politicized appropriation of the mapping practices by artist-activists in the last decades has helped to transform cartography into a tool of criticism and counter-power. Nevertheless, we
live in a totally mapped era in which our expectations, gestures
and itineraries are registered all the time, be it while circulating in
the streets, exchanging messages and documents via the internet,
or crossing physical or symbolic borders. Why then produce more
maps in a mapped world? My response is that we need to make
and remake maps not only in order to confront the forms of control but also so we can expose the underlying mechanisms. Most
of all we need to produce counter-maps in order to create actions
that might affect our perceptions of social space and its different
vectors, to change our modes of looking at the world and create
new dialogues and discoveries. Counter-cartography is less a visual object that accumulates information than the opportunity to go
beyond the "proper" representation of traditional maps. Mapping
in a different way means redefining maps critically. This redefinition of cartography is an expression of dissent against the power
executed by privileged groups who seek to dominate others. At the
same time, it is an opportunity to democratize the techniques and
the practices of the creation of maps beyond the figure of the artist, activist or specialist. A statement cited from an interview I did
with the members of the Counter-Cartography Collective seems
to summarize the spirit of this proposal in other words: "To map
systems of oppression, not oppressed people!"
Special thanks to Julia Ruiz Di Giovanni
for her help with the editing of this text.
Translation by Timo Bartholl

30

Introduction

Endnotes
1. bureaudetudes.org
2. countercartographies.org
3. iconoclasistas.net
4. The Situationist International (1957-1972) was an organization of artists
and theorists searching for ways to criticize and transform the conditions in capitalist cities while superating the concept of art through
subversive everyday practices and artistic interventions.
5. Fluxus was an international, multidisciplinary group of artists, poets
and composers initiated in the early 1960s. The group realized works,
performances and artistic projects with an emphasis on processes and
actions that encouraged the active participation of its spectators.
6. Mark Lombardi describes his “narrative structures” as follows: “In 1994 I
began a series of drawings I refer to as ‘narrative structures.’ Most were
executed in graphite or pen and ink on paper. Some are quite large,
measuring up to 5x12 feet. I call them ‘narrative structures’ because
each consists of a network of lines and notations that are meant to convey a story, typically a recent event of interest to me, like the collapse of
a large international bank, trading company, or investment house. One of
my goals is to explore the interaction of political, social, and economic
forces in contemporary affairs.” (Lombardi, 2001).
References
Bureau d’Études 2004. Resymbolising Machines: Art after Öyvind Fahlström.
Third Text, 18: 609-616.
Casas-Cortés, M. & Cobarrubias, S. 2007. Drifting Through the Knowledge
Machine. In Shukaitis, S. & Graeber, D., eds. Constituent Imagination: Militant Investigations // Collective Theorization. Oakland: AK Press: 112-126.
countercartographies.org/download/drifting_through_the_knowledge_
machine.pdf, 14 January 2018.
Lombardi, M. 2001. The Recent Drawings: An Overview. Cabinet Mag.
cabinetmagazine.org/issues/2/lombardi.php, 29 June 2018.
Sholette, G. 2011. Dark matter: art and politics in the age of enterprise culture,
Marxism and culture. New York: PlutoPress.
Illustrations
page 27 Mark Lombardi, World Finance Corporation and Associates, c. 197084, Miami, Ajman, Bogota-Caracas (Brigada 2506 : Cuban Anti-Castro Bay of
Pigs Veteran) (7th version), 1999, Colored pencil and graphite on paper, 69
1/8 x 84 inches, Private collection, Courtesy Donald Lombardi and Pierogi
Gallery
page 29 Counter Cartographies Collective, disOrientation Guide 2.0, 2009
page 35-39 Bureau d’Études, World Government, 2013, Courtesy Bureau
d’Études

Counter-Cartographies

31

Counter-Cartographies
as a Tool for Action

Mapping the Anti-Eviction Struggle in the San Francisco Bay Area
Anti-Eviction Map – Erin McElroy
antievictionmap.com

38

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

The Anti-Eviction Mapping Project (AEMP) is a data visualization, data analysis and storytelling collective documenting the contours of gentrification in and beyond the San Francisco Bay Area.
The project emerged in 2013, focusing on connections between
San Francisco real estate speculation and forced displacement,
but has since grown in both its geographic scope and methodology. Working regionally, the project now studies the intersectional
causes and effects of displacement, while also engaging in narrative mapping work. At times we analyze correlations between rental prices, evictions, and demographic mutation, making use of city
and county official data sources; in others, we crowdsource data in
the forms of survey, oral history and video work. We firmly believe
that no one data set can ever do justice in describing the intricacies
and entanglements of what is often discoursed as gentrification in
the spaces in which we work, and not even the combined data sets

pacted communities – but with those experiencing the violence of
contemporary gentrification.
The AEMP recognizes the representational power of maps and
strives to create ones that reveal a counter-history to those employed
by the speculators of real estate and Silicon Valley techno-utopics. As
we have found, disproportionately, those being evicted from their
homes throughout San Francisco, Alameda, and San Mateo counties are Black, Latinx and working-class communities, along with
female-headed households, elders and youth, yet inversely, those
moving to the region to work in high-paid technology jobs are young
white men. Thus, we endeavor to highlight the racial and gendered
logics of Bay Area real estate and Silicon Valley incited gentrification
while also remaining attentive to the histories that have led to the
current moment in which, for instance, evictions are at an all-time
high in San Francisco, and in which rents are growing faster in Oak-

that we work with can fully narrate a history of the present. Nevertheless, we hope that by releasing an array of geospatial visualizations, regional stories of urban dispossession become more lucid.
Over the last four years we have produced over 100 digital
counter-cartographic pieces, over 100 oral histories and video
works, several reports, murals, projection projects, protests and
community events. The conclusions and questions that we invoke in our cartographic projects are conceived of collectively,
amongst AEMP members and in collaboration with our community partners. Inevitably, we bring our own situated knowledges
to our analytic approach, and as such invoke feminist, antiracist,
and decolonial spatial analysis, embracing what we articulate as an
abolitionist perspective on private property. In doing so, we practice what Kim Tallbear (2014) describes as "objectivity in action"
or inquiring not at a distance but as situated within the spaces we
study. As such, we find it important not to produce data "for" im-

land than in any other US city. These histories range from settler colonial ones beginning in the late 18th century to those of 1930s redlining federal projects that constituted conditions of racial segregation
and racialized disinvestment, to Cold War histories that fomented
Silicon Valley regional dominance.
Although our work is largely Bay Area focused, we are increasingly contextualizing our data and maps within broader ones. As
the US is being reconstituted by a president and administration
built upon white supremacist relationship to private property,
our current work seeks to undo the racial logics that have, from
the earliest colonial moment, fomented racialized dispossession.
At the same time, we seek to produce new maps and data that respond to the current moment, studying past and likely future loss
of Section 8 and public housing, the demographics of displacement, the entwining of real estate and Silicon Valley grammars,
and the power of community resistance.

Mapping the Anti-Eviction Struggle in the San Francisco Bay Area

39

Narratives of Displacement and Resistance

In 2014, the AEMP launched an oral history project, Narratives
of Displacement and Resistance. While we had been producing
maps of speculation, eviction, and racialized violence for over a
year, we had felt that our maps were not adequately detailing deep
neighborhood history and personal stories of loss, change and, not
least importantly, protest. Therefore we initiated our oral history
project to highlight stories otherwise elided in qualitatively-based
counter-mapping. More than anything, we wanted to texture our
existing maps with narrative data, offering insight and analytics
that only oral histories could produce. We also wanted to publish
this content offline, as well as online, and so we began painting
a version of the online version in San Francisco's Clarion Alley, in collaboration with the Clarion Alley Mural Project1. We
launched our online oral history map alongside the release of our
mural in 2015. At the time, the oral history map only contained
30 interviews, geolocated upon an interactive interface. At this
point, we have recorded over 100 life stories detailing gentrification spatial struggles in San Francisco and Alameda counties. Our
mural highlights nine of the San Francisco stories with a call-thewall feature so that viewers can call a number (+1-415-319-6865)
and hear the featured stories. At the time of the release of the
mural, many of the tenants featured were still in their homes as
a result of direct action, and so their stories serve as direct action
tools, with methods, inspiration and analytics useful in fighting displacement. We also included the story of Alex Nieto, who
was killed by the police in 2014 as a result of gentrification when
newcomers to Bernal Heights racially profiled Alex and called the
San Francisco Police Department. We included his story, narrat-

40

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

ed by his parents, to mark the intersections of racialized policing
and gentrification. The mural also sits directly across from the police station, so its own geolocation is apropos. When we released
our mural and oral history map, we also released a zine project
that we had been working on for over a year, which included poetry, photographic, drawing and story submissions as well as transcripts of oral histories and know-your-rights resource guides.

Listen to the Silence Dance Project

Listen to the Silence Dance Project (LTS) was organized by the
Stanford community to tell stories that matter to them through
their favorite medium – dance. Inspired by the Anti-Eviction
Mapping Project in San Francisco, in 2017, the LTS members
brought three of their favorite narratives conducted by the AEMP
to life through dance.2
The danced narratives, as well as all other of the AEMP's oral
history narratives, are geolocated online.3
"Growing up in Chinatown, there were always tourists around
– we were always on display. This blogger wrote, 'Come to Chinatown. It's cheap, trendy, and ethnic.' … He doesn't know that the
reason why Chinatown is so cheap is because people aren't being
paid their wages."
"I'm trying to hold on to this place. It's become more of like, I'm losing myself into the fight. To the point where I'm asking myself, do
I really want to do this? To myself – or do I really have a choice?"

As a “unicorn” startup founded in San Francisco in 2008, Airbnb has since
grown its tentacles across the globe, imparting gentrifying effects far and
wide. In San Francisco, where there are now over 7,000 listings and in
which 57 percent of listings are full-time vacation rentals, there has been
a loss of long-term housing as apartments are converted to lucrative
short-term rentals. The average room in San Francisco costs over $200/
night, and numerous tenants have been displaced to have their homes
transformed to accommodate tourists. As the AEMP has found, there

are serial evictors in San Francisco, such as Fergus O’Sullivan, who have
evicted tenants through numerous means and who then have listed emptied rooms on Airbnb. There are even former SRO buildings, such as the
Negev, once housing some of San Francisco’s most precarious residents,
that are now “digerati dorms,” serving as tech incubation residencies. As
the AEMP has found, not only in San Francisco but also in Oakland, Los
Angeles and Santa Monica, the neighborhoods with the most Airbnb
units are also the neighborhoods with the highest eviction rates.

Mapping the Anti-Eviction Struggle in the San Francisco Bay Area

41

"My mentor owned a warehouse in the mission that he rented out
to artists who were trying to stop using drugs and alcohol. We
had spoken word, music events, art shows and 12-step meetings
– it was a wonderful space. But we lost our home when our landlord evicted us. The city protects the wealthy. These people don't
get what makes SF special, and that's why the're going to lose it."

Oakland Community Power Map

As part of our partnership with the Oakland Creative Neighborhood Coalition, in 2016 we created a Community Power Map in
Oakland's Betti Ono Gallery. This collaborative map was an endeavor in reframing conversations about the Bay Area, so we didn't
only talk about loss and destruction but also about community assets worth celebrating and fighting for. The base layer for the map
in the Betti Ono gallery was collectively drawn by AEMP and Betti
Ono members on two walls, representing Oakland's geography.
Following this, members of the public entered the gallery, adding
respective assets and markers of community power to the wall.
Before taking the map down, we digitized its contents so that it
now lives online4. Additionally, since dismantling it, we've created
other Community Power Maps throughout the Bay Area, working with youth groups, anti-eviction coalitions and more. But for
us, the idea of creating these power maps stemmed from an Oakland-based collaboration in which it was asked of us to think beyond normative pessimistic framings of contemporary Oakland.
The digital map is now also part of a report we produced with the
statewide tenant advocate group Tenants Together in 2016, titled
Counterpoints: Stories and Data for Resisting Displacement.

Endnotes
1. antievictionmap.com/mural-in-clarion-alley
2. youtube.com/watch?v=BTzq4qAeXrQ&feature=youtu.be&list=PLiZPJJzS3z5tr5S-8PFbIOJB-vcCzlwaI
3. antievictionmappingproject.net/narratives.html
4. arcg.is/2bC5flY
References
TallBear, K. 2014. Standing With and Speaking as Faith: A Feminist-Indigenous
Approach to Inquiry. Journal of Research Practice, 10(2).
jrp.icaap.org/index.php/jrp/article/view/405, 14 January 2018.
Illustrations
Maps by Anti-Eviction Mapping Project
Photograph previous spread left by The Saito Group and Anti-Eviction Mapping Project: Light projection “This story is mine. I am real.“
This Light Atlas projection is part of a collaborative project conducted
between the AEMP and the Saito Group, which involved crowdsourcing
eviction narratives and oral histories, and then transcribing them and weaving
them together in political-poetic texts. These were then projected upon San
Francisco buildings, along with information on fighting evictions.
Photographs previous spread right: signs by Anti-Eviction Mapping Project
These posters were generated by an array of housing justice collectives and
activists from San Francisco’s Chinatown to New Orleans and Venice. They
have been used in protest against the gentrifying effects that Airbnb poses
upon specific neighborhoods, in which long-term housing is lost and converted into short-term vacation rentals.

42

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

44

45

A New Social Cartography

1

Defending Traditional Territories by Mapping in the Amazon
Projeto Nova Cartografia Social da Amazônia – Alfredo Wagner Berno de Almeida, Sheilla Borges Dourado, Carolina Bertolini
novacartografiasocial.com

46

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Through the use of social mapping techniques, the research work
of the New Social Cartography of the Amazon Project (PNCSA)2
seeks to analyze the differentiated processes of territorialization
which are currently underway in the Amazon region. In doing
so, the work focuses on the relationship between these processes and the emergence of collective identities embedded in social
movements. These identities are multiple and make up an often
overlooked Amazonian socio-cultural diversity. The different
collective identities are held together through local denominations such as: riverside dwellers (ribeirinhos), rubber tappers (seringueiros), maroons (quilombolas), indigenous peoples, piassaba palm extractors (piaçabeiros), small-scale fishers (pescadores
artesanais), nut collectors (castanheiros), artisans (artesãos and
artesãs)3, urban indigenous communities, babassu coconut collectors (quebradeiras de coco babaçu) and collectors of açaí fruit
(peconheiros).
Each of these categories of identity defines itself according
to its organizational form. Through successive mobilizations
they construct their own specific territories. Through a growing cultural self-awareness they have mobilized forces in order
to defend their territories from predatory commercial interests.
Companies that seek commercial interests are mostly responsible
for environmental devastation in the Amazon, especially deforestation and contamination of water resources. For this reason,
social movements have carried out campaigns against loggers,
large farming and cattle ranching projects, iron-ore plants and
mining companies.
The central issue is that indigenous and maroon lands, like
those effectively controlled by traditional peoples and communities, are currently threatened by this expansion. The threat derives
from the fact that these traditional peoples and communities live
and occupy areas of great environmental preservation and significant vegetation cover. Social mapping produced by communities
about their own territories translates this strong environmental
consciousness and its effects into cartographic representations.
The objective of PNCSA is to map these popular mobilization
forces while describing and geo-referencing them based on what
is considered to be relevant by the studied communities themselves. At the same time the mapping work presupposes training
and capacity building of members of these communities. Teaching the community members about constitutional provisions, pertinent environmental legislation and the use of elementary GPS
techniques makes up an initial stage of the PNCSA work. Such
capacity building is consolidated through the mapping workshops
carried out in the communities themselves. In accordance with a
composition defined by their own members, these workshops result in activities that delimit perimeters and solidify information
obtained through direct observation and from different kinds of
stories. This contributes to a sufficiently precise ethnographic description. Throughout the fieldwork we verified the recurrent use
of the expression "traditionally-occupied lands"4 in the lists of the
social movements' demands. This was a constant reference, and
it may indicate a growing perception of these social agents in regards to violations of their territorial rights.
Social movements that demand the recognition and protection of human rights regarding special identities in urban areas
are partners in social cartography as well. Representatives of other

minority groups, such as lesbians, gays and transgender activists in
Manaus, also produced their maps, through which they intended
to become visible to the State and other social agents.
In order to facilitate wide dissemination, the results of the
work are published in the form of booklets (fascículos) containing
maps, excerpts from narratives created by members of researched
communities as well as the group's demands. The members of the
mapped communities mainly distribute these booklets themselves.
PNCSA has also been establishing itself through an articulation
from researchers belonging to higher education institutions on the
one hand and participants of social movements in the Pan-Amazon
on the other hand. As of today, their main goal is to strengthen territorial rights of traditional peoples and communities.
So far the maps have become supportive instruments managed
by traditional peoples and communities for demands addressed to
the State as well as for demands against the State. The maps are
produced by members of the communities themselves through
the mapping workshops that take place within the community.
They have become technical resources that ensure accuracy and
precision regarding the boundaries of the territories proposed by
community associations and social movements.
Since the publication of the book Carajás: The War of Maps
(Almeida, 1994) we have been consolidating the basis of the New
Social Cartography. The critical aspect is the evidence that there is
an internal conflict in the lexicon inside the field of knowledge on
social cartography. In this sense, the term "New" in the expression
New Social Cartography corresponds to a critical analysis of the
conventional use of other similar expressions like "participatory
mapping", "collaborative mapping" or "cultural mapping", used by
the World Bank or by big enterprises like Google, megaprojects
and NGOs. These mappings correspond to practices in which the
"participation" of traditional people and communities is commonly restricted to limits, and sometimes these limits turn "participation" into mere "ratification" of decisions taken by someone else.

Producing Situational Maps

As mentioned earlier, the research experiences of the PNCSA
focus on diverse situations in which social agents use their ethnic identities in order to categorize themselves and others with
the goal of interacting and forming political collectives in an organizational sense. Ethnicity thereby serves as a collective mode
of action and representation. We have focused the fieldwork and
analyses on the ethnic boundaries that define groups and not on
the cultural content that they express. They reflect a new reality
and more precisely the tendency of groups to invest deeply in a
collective identity in order to demand rights that are essential to
their physical and cultural reproduction. This new reality appears
to be associated with the self-definition of social agents and their
condition as legal subjects.
In accordance with PNCSA techniques, one could say that
the situational maps refer to concrete occurrences of conflict in
regions which are already delimited with relative precision. The
goal is to delimit specific territorialities, providing conditions for
a more detailed description of the elements considered relevant
by the members of the studied communities in order to make up
a cartographic base. In this sense they are different from thematic

A New Social Cartography

47

"militant capital"6 belonging to associations and representations of
peoples and communities. This combination considerably broadens the spectrum of map production and profoundly redefines the
current use of "participation" in social mapping.
This way, traditional communities become a source of information production. In continuation, traditional communities may
also be able to monitor their own territories in the near future. They
will be able to manage it in real time, despite of difficulties, such
as the need to learn how to interpret satellite images or challenges,
such as finding clear images of the Amazon region due to constant
cloud cover. In response to this impediment, the use of drones has
been pointed out as a solution for obtaining better imagery.

Social Conflicts and Maps

maps since they consider sketch-maps as being part of the choices
made by social agents in order to compose the maps that should be
included in the booklet5.
The situational map explains the dynamic character of the
mapped realities. It reflects the communities' points of view at a
given moment and may also present changes depending on the
processes taking place in the territories and the perceptions of the
members of the mapping communities.
The work of social mapping thus includes two aspects: an
ethnographic one, which requires academic work, direct observation techniques, detailed descriptions and criteria to select information, and another one carried out by the social agents themselves, defining the use of instruments, their choice, the selection
of what is included in the map. PNCSA not only contributes to
the training of social agents, but also respects their autonomy of
practice. Therefore, the decisions are left to the local communities after they have learned techniques to tie together GPS points
and other basic technical resources. They can decide whether to
include or exclude information which is not regarded intrinsic or
which is confidential. This is not a purely quantitative mapping
of certain vegetation types, biomes or ecosystems. It is rather a
social mapping that produces material, termed situational maps.
They are distinguished from participatory maps. Because participatory maps, such as planning instruments, are defined by planners in order to incorporate communities in decisions which are
made for them or will affect them. Unlike these maps, our social
mappings work in favor of social movements and collective identities as well as intrinsic organizational forms (of mobilization
and solidarity) adopted by the groups themselves (Almeida, 2013:
157-173).
Manual work is usually seen separately from intellectual work.
We, on the contrary, believe that both forms of work are considered
intellectual work. Besides, other traditional people, communities,
indigenous and maroons have also become capable of using a GPS
or software like ArcGIS. The use of these technological tools combines the technical competence with the community's interests.
In this context, the technical expertise provided by universities in
producing maps together with communities is associated with the

48

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

In many situations the maps and booklets functioned as a pressure device, demonstrating the weakness of official decisions and
showing evidence of the gaps in which municipal leaders could
intervene. In this sense, the recourse to ethnography provides scientific authenticity to indigenous demands. In Jambuaçu (Pará),
where maroons suffered serious damages from the explosion of a
mineral pipeline inside their villages, the booklet was used in the
judicial process requesting compensation for environmental damages. Within their urban perimeter, the indigenous people of the
Beija-Flor Community, Rio Preto da Eva (Amazonas), pressured
the municipal government to expropriate the area and grant it to
them – after decades of conflict. In the municipal councils of Rio
Preto da Eva and Novo Airão (Amazonas) indigenous members,
maroons and riverside dwellers held up their hands showing the
booklets they produced themselves. The booklets are seen as documents that show the evidence of their territories. In the case of
Novo Airão, the areas set aside for the Jaú National Park overlap
the remnant areas of maroons in Tambor. The maroons appreciated the experience of producing that map, which became a required reference document for anyone interested in understanding the dynamic of the conflict. They released the booklet in the
Municipal Council of Novo Airão in order to make their territorial demands public.
Following this and through their use for political mobilization,
the maps were transformed into instruments of struggle once they
focused on territorial and ethnic rights. In the conflict between
the maroons from Alcântara (MA) and the Brazilian Space Agency (AEB), the intrusion on maroon territory was ethnographically
documented by a historian and by agricultural technicians who were
also members of maroon families having been displaced in 1986.
These professionals attended technical training courses provided by
PNCSA and carried out all the mapping work. We have witnessed an
undeniable political dimension, which organizes demands through
the construction of the maps themselves, making this work support
mobilization and reinforcement of ethnic identity.
The work of PNCSA has been carried out since 2005 through
processes of politicization and criticism of geographisms (approaches that restrict the territory's mapping exclusively to a
physical dimension) as well as the old vision of biologized agents
(representing the acting subject from an exclusively biological or
genetic point of view). The mediator's position assumes a new
form, and academic participation takes place through criteria of

competence, expertise and scientific wisdom. There is an intellectual division of labor that requires acuity in the elaboration of
maps and booklets. Research relations have been patiently constructed, especially given that this is a period of attempts to institute new rules of tutelage (legal subordination to a tutor) through
the redefinition of strategies by many NGOs (Almeida 2008a:
105). Renewals among social movement leaders on a large scale
have also played an important role.
In all of the situations studied, a recurring point of critique refers to the "personification of collectives" (Micelli, 2007), which
is evident in phrases such as: "Indigenous people think that…" or
"Peasants don't accept that…". We avoided to reproduce these commonplaces and decided to publish a list of those presented in map
workshops, showing the authorship of the correspondent talks.
The booklets therefore have multiple authors. Another difficulty
concerns the attempts to usurp political representation by traditional peoples and communities, which leaves the action of mediators open to constant questioning.
In this respect, social mapping represents an instrument that
strengthens the emergence of collective identities and at the same
time balances out the emphasis on biodiversity. This focus on
natural elements usually appears in environmentalist speeches regarding the Amazon region.
Therefore, social mapping creates ties to cultural diversity and
to the mobilization of traditional peoples and communities regarding territorial and cultural rights.
Endnotes
1. This article and all its illustrations are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License (CC
BY-NC-ND 4.0).
2. The New Social Cartography of the Amazon Project (PNCSA) began
in 2005, linked to the Federal University of Amazonas (UFAM) and
financed by the Ford Foundation. Currently there are approximately
270 organizational forms and 240 researchers participating in PNCSA
activities. Since 2005 PNCSA has produced 163 booklets, 70 books,
17 map syntheses, 21 bulletins, 12 videos, 3 catalogues, 6 reports, 5
exhibitions, 10 brochures (cadernos) and 10 situational maps, mobilizing
different organizational forms. Around 230,000 copies of booklets with
maps have been produced and serve as established instruments for
demanding the recognition of traditional peoples’ and communities’ land
rights. In 2016, the access to the PNCSA website exceeded 93,000 hits
involving 109 countries.
3.
4.

5.

6.

These groups use various fibres, such as arumã, tucum, cipó ambé, as
well as leaves and seeds.
“Traditional occupied lands” is the same expression found in the article
231 of the 1988 Brazilian Constitution and the articles of the ILO Convention 169, ratified by the Brazilian State in 2003 (Almeida 2008b: 138).
One of the most complete examples of this instrument’s application, called a situational map, can be found in: Guerra Ecológica nos
Babaçuais, by Alfredo Wagner, Joaquim Shiraishi and Cynthia Carvalho
Martins, published by PNCSA in 2005.
“To speak of militant capital is to insist on a dimension of commitment,
of which political capital renders insufficient account” (My own translation; Matonti & Poupeau, 2004: 7).

References
Almeida, A.W.B. de, Shiraishi, J. & Martins, C.C. 2005. Guerra Ecológica nos
Babaçuais: O Processo de Devastação dos Palmeirais, a Elevação do Preço
de Commodities e o Aquecimento do Mercado de Terras na Amazônia. São
Luís: MIQCB.
Almeida, A.W.B. de 1994. A guerra dos mapas. Belém: Falangola.
Almeida, A.W.B. de 2008a. Antropologia dos’ Archivos’ da Amazônia. Rio de
Janeiro: Casa 8.
Almeida, A.W.B. de 2008b. Terras de Quilombo, Terras Indígenas, ‘Babaçuais
Livres’, ‘Castanhais do Povo’, Faxinais e Fundos de Pasto: Terras Tradicionalmente Ocupadas. Manaus: PPGSCA/UFAM.
Almeida, A.W.B. de 2013. Nova Cartografia Social: territorialidades Específicas e Politização da Consciência das Fronteiras. In Almeida, A.W.B. de &
Almeida Farias Júnior, E. de, eds. Povos e Comunidades Tradicionais. Nova
Cartografia Social. Manaus: UEA Edições: 157-173.
Bourdieu, P. 1998. Contrafogos: Táticas para Enfrentar a Invasão Neoliberal. Rio
de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar Editor.
Hobsbawm, E.J. 1998. A Era Dos Extremos: Breve História do Século XX, 19141991. São Paulo: Cia das Letras.
Matonti, F. & Poupeau, F. 2004. Le Capital Militant. Actes de la Recherche en
Sciences Sociales, 155(5): 4-11.
Miceli, S. 1992. Introdução: A Força do Sentido. In Miceli, S. ed., Bourdieu, Pierre.
A Economia das Trocas Simbólicas. São Paulo: Perspectiva.
Illustrations
Photograph previous spread by PNCSA: Indigenous Kaxinawa from Rui
Humaitá producing sketches during mapping workshop.
Photograph opposite page by PNCSA: Marrons from the river Andirá, community Barreirinha, producing a sketch during mapping workshop together.
Photograph above by PNCSA: Indigenous women from the river Cuieiras,
community Manaus, learning how to register coordinates with GPS equipment.

A New Social Cartography

49

50

51

53

A View from Above

Balloon Mapping Bourj Al Shamali

Claudia Martinez Mansell, Mustapha Dakhloul, Firas Ismail
bourjalshamali.org

54

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Lebanon currently houses 53 percent of a total of approximately
450,000 registered Palestinian refugees (UNRWA, 2016). Bourj
Al Shamali is located three kilometers east of Tyre in the south
of Lebanon; approximately 22,000 registered refugees live here.
From the original 7,000 refugees who fled or were expelled from
their homes in 1948, the majority of the population in the camp is
currently formed by second and third-generation refugees. Like
the other official refugee camps in Lebanon, Bourj Al Shamali
suffers from serious problems: no proper infrastructure, overcrowding, unemployment and poverty. To add a further level of
complexity, large numbers of Palestinian refugees from Syria
have now moved into the camp. The arrival of these twice-over
refugees has resulted in a deterioration of the already overcrowded living conditions.
The ancestors of Bourj Al Shamali's population lived in Tiberias
and Safad in historic Palestine, now Israel, where they led an agricultural existence that has now been completely lost by camp residents, who have increasingly grown detached from the land (Martinez Mansell, 2016). With this in mind, Al Houla Association, one
of the local NGOs working in the camp and the base for the local
camp committee that is working to improve conditions in the camp,
started exploring the possibility of launching an urban agriculture
pilot project and the creation of a green space in the camp. Having
worked at various times in the camp over the past decade and a half,
I (Claudia Martinez Mansell) became involved in this project.
For this initiative, a map of the camp was needed to discuss potential locations and to visualize potential water sources. But it
turns out that it is difficult to find a map of Bourj Al Shamali, even
though it has been in existence for over 60 years (UNRWA, 2017).
With the complex politics of the region, the maps that do exist are
withheld by international organizations that justify their discretion in the name of security and do not share them with the camp
inhabitants or with the local camp committee. On online maps only
the main street is marked, and on Google Earth the very low-resolution images of the area do not allow you to see the space clearly
and to identify the narrow streets and buildings. On one Lebanese
paper map of Beirut, for example, the refugee camps appear as grey
blobs, providing no details about the interior of these spaces (Ghubril, 2010). This lack of cartographic information stands in stark
juxtaposition to the ever-present outlines of historical Palestine
that are memorialized on walls and surfaces of Bourj Al Shamali
and many other Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon.1
Therefore, in 2015 we decided to launch an initiative in cooperation with the local camp committee's leader, Mr. Mahmoud Al
Joumma, in order to map the refugee settlement ourselves. The
budget was small, and we wanted and needed to have the whole
community on board since this would be the first map produced
by and for the camp's refugee community. This turned out to be
no simple task. Mapping refugee camps is politically sensitive,
and refugee populations are understandably wary concerning the
security implications and possible uses of such maps.2 Aerial photography and mapping processes are permanently associated with
military surveillance, having been used for everything from geographic exploration to secret spy missions. Looking for options,

we learned about balloon mapping and decided to use this Do-ItYourself (DIY) aerial photography tool that could allow us to take
aerial images from the camp and use them to produce a map.
To dispel local concerns at Bourj Al Shamali, it was therefore crucial
for us to work under the supervision of the local committee. Key
local committee members informed the community, the various
factions within the camp, and the Lebanese army about the planned
balloon flights. Our choice of tool would also prove to be crucial.
Balloon mapping was developed by Public Lab, an open network
of community organizers, educators, technologists and researchers
that was founded in 2010 as an open-source, grassroots data-gathering and research initiative. Their aim is to democratize inexpensive
and accessible DIY techniques in order to address environmental
issues that affect people. At the same time, they try to promote a
DIY citizenship as a means of transformative political action (Ratto & Boler, 2014). Their tools are an example of the increasing use
of new and creative ways to share data on environmental decisions
(The Economist, 2008). Balloon mapping was first developed and
tested by citizen activists on the Gulf Coast of the USA after the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill of 2010. It was a reaction to concerns
that the government and BP were not adequately informing citizens about the actual extent of environmental damage. Compared
to other mapping platforms that have a more humanitarian focus,
such as Humanitarian OpenStreetMap or Ground Truth and Map
Kibera (see article page 228), Public Lab's tools take a lower technology, community-oriented approach.3
In Bourj Al Shamali, this low-tech approach proved key to solving the problem. At first, there was disappointment from the local
committee and key team members at just how low-tech the equipment was: a 1.5-meter wide reusable latex/chloroprene balloon, a
300-meter long line, swivel clips for attaching the balloon and the
camera, rubber bands for making a camera cradle, reusable Velcro
for closing the balloon, some carabineers to attach things together,
and a camera. However, this soon contributed to making our work
with the community non-threatening and approachable, when
compared to using drones. The simplicity of the process also allowed many people to participate. The digital camera needs to be
one that can be set on an automated mode taking images every few
seconds. It can be a smartphone or a basic point-and-shoot device
set to continuous mode. It is placed in a plastic bottle for protection and secured to the balloon string. The process of launching
the balloon is also simple. You tie it all up, you let the helium-filled
balloon rise up in the air, and after a flight of 10-20 minutes you
bring the balloon down again. For best quality images it is advisable to choose a bright day. It is also important to be on the lookout
for obstacles, such as houses, power lines and trees. The altitude
of the balloons has an effect on the scale of the map as well as the
resolutions of the images. In Bourj Al Shamali we took images at
various altitudes in order to ensure high-quality images of rooftops but also good overviews of the camp.
When problems arose, many were able to chip in and help, as for
example when a camp carpenter built us a box to protect the camera or when the high school physics teacher offered us ideas about

A View from Above

55

how to stabilize our camera in the high winds which the balloon
regularly encountered. Once our balloon was shot with a pellet
gun by some idle youths and the local tire shop tried to patch the
holes. We were also continually invited onto rooftops and into
people's homes to help us accomplish our work.
After waiting in the tire shop for a balloon replacement, someone suggested that we contact a photographer in the camp who
was planning to start using drones to photograph weddings. Like
anywhere else, drones have now become accessible and affordable
in Lebanon and can more easily accomplish the same tasks as balloons. But as any military operator of drones can tell you, drones
offer power while rendering the operator invulnerable; whereas it
was precisely the vulnerability of the balloon that necessarily generated conversations around the camp and, with time, won us supporters. The history of drones is that of an eye turned into a weapon (Chamayou, 2015); our red balloon high above the camp was
different. It was less threatening and more poetic, with the string
tying us to it, acting as some kind of umbilical cord that required
us to be present in the spaces we were mapping (if you closely look
at the images we produced, you can see us in many of them). Our
red balloon was visible from everywhere in the camp, and people
often mentioned to us from where they had seen it. This visibility
was a way of winning trust.
But mapping with the balloon was not an easy task. There were
many false starts, and at times we wondered if we were going to
succeed. Mahmoud Al Jomma's wise reflections on our doubts
were reassuring: For him, irrespective of what final result we obtained, the balloon had gotten people thinking and talking about
mapping and spatial awareness, and this process was already a
result. For the youth from Bourj Al Shamali who worked on the
project, there was great appeal in knowing that they were bypassing governmental and corporate control over geo-spatial information. In a society where young people encounter so many obstacles
in their efforts to contribute to their community, they were happy
to be helping with producing something useful for the community and to be given space to solve problems by themselves through
experimenting. They were also very excited to be changing the
community's as well as their own perceptions of being helpless
and ineffectual and to see themselves not as beneficiaries of an
innovation but as partners and co-creators of the solutions to their
problems.

56

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Endnotes
1. For more information on the use of the map of Israel / Palestine as
a celebrated symbol by both Israelis and Palestinians see Wallach (2011).
2. The report by UNOCHA, Humanitarianism in the Network Age, includes thought-provoking questions on the possible security implications
of satellite imagery produced in Sudan.
3. For a discussion of these approaches see the World Bank report, “Interactive Community Mapping: Between Empowerment and Effectiveness”
from 2014.
References
Chamayou, G. 2015. Drone Theory. First edition. London: Penguin Books.
Ghubril, B. 2010. Zawarib Beirut & Beyond: Road Atlas of Greater Beirut Plus 75
Municipalities from Tabarja to Choueifat. Beirut: Zawarib SARL.
Martinez Mansell, C. 2016. Camp Code: How to Navigate a Refugee Settlement. placesjournal.org/article/camp-code, 19 June 2016.
Ratto, M. & Boler, M. eds. 2014. DIY Citizenship: Critical Making and Social
Media. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
The Economist 2008. Revolutions Coloured Green.
economist.com/node/12641740, 13 January 2018.
UNRWA. Burj Shemali Camp.
unrwa.org/where-we-work/lebanon/burj-shemali-camp, 13 January 2018.
UNRWA. Where We Work.
unrwa.org/where-we-work/Lebanon, 14 January 2018.
Waldheim, C. 1999. Aerial Representation and the Recovery of Landscape.
In Corner, J. ed. Recovering Landscape: Essays in Contemporary Landscape
Architecture: 120-139.
Wallach, Y. 2011. Trapped in Mirror-Images: The Rhetoric of Maps in Israel/
Palestine. Political Geography, 30(7): 358-369.
Illustrations
Guide by Grassroots Mapping with Balloons and Kites (publiclab.org),
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 License (CC
BY-SA 3.0).

A View from Above

57

Mapping Safe Passages

Real-Time Interventions at the Maritime Borders of Europe

Stephan Liebscher, Ina Fisher1
alarmphone.org / watchthemed.net

60

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

During the long summer of migration in 2015, the importance
of digital tools for transnational movements of people has been
widely acknowledged. While states have been using geographical information and maps to control movements of people across
space for a long time, transnational migrants and support network
have found creative ways of using online mapping platforms to
organise their journey and to evade state practices of control and
immobilisation.
Stephan Liebscher (SL) spoke with Ina Fischer (IF), member of
the Alarmphone, about the use of the online mapping crowdmap
watchthemed.net to ensure safe trips for people crossing the Mediterranean Sea and enable their participation in decision-making.
SL: Why did the Alarmphone start its work and what are the aims behind it?
IF: The idea for the project emerged in 2013, after two boats in
emergency situations in the Central Mediterranean Sea were not
assisted: On 3 October 2013, 366 people drowned close to the island of Lampedusa, yet another catastrophe that could have easily
been prevented by means of providing adequate rescue at sea. Only
a few days later, again more than 250 people drowned after they
had tried to call for help for hours – in vain: Based on accounts of
survivors, assistance was knowingly withheld despite numerous
SOS calls. The situation of distress and non-assistance was reconstructed in detail on the online monitoring platform watchthemed.
net. These two cases were a key moment in raising various questions: What would have happened if these people in distress, being
systematically ignored by coast guards, had had the option to call
an independent phone hotline? Wouldn't it be possible to amplify
distress calls through immediate appeals to the public? In October
2014, the Alarmphone started its work: a telephone hotline – working 24 hours – for people in distress at sea, informing coast guards
and pressuring rescue authorities in real time via public media and
politicians, if necessary. Furthermore, with this work we emphasise migrants' perspectives and build a counter-narrative: We bear
witness to the movement of migration from below.
SL: Can you describe one typical case?

The people mostly call us on cheap mobiles. Without their GPS
position, their lives depend on their exact information about the
time and place of their departure. When we are alerted by friends
or family members, we ask for a direct contact to the boat. We immediately call the passengers to ask them about their current situation: How many people, women or children are on the boat? Are
there any sick people?
SL: How do you use maps to handle these emergency situations?
IF: We insert the GPS position of a boat into the map-application
on watchthemed.net – a sister project – to figure out in real time
which national coast guard is in charge of the rescue, as it shows
the so-called official Search and Rescue Zones and other additional layers. The Alarmphone team then forwards all relevant information to the responsible European coast guard. By using the
mapping platform, we can also identify if a boat is threatened by
an illegal push-back or pull-back by the coastguards. Live tracking
maps like vesselfinder.com or marinetraffic.com indicate if civilian rescue vessels or cargo vessels are nearby. Other important actors – the military vessels of NATO, Frontex or missions such as
EUNAFVOR MED – are not displayed as they can turn off their
transmitter. We additionally use wind maps and weather forecasts
to learn about potential current risks at sea. In the aftermath, we
publish relevant cases on the platform watchthemed.net.
SL: You mentioned the crowdmapping platform watchthemed.net.
Can you tell us the story behind it?
IF: watchthemed.net originates from a research project called Forensic Oceanography.2 It was launched in 2011 to support a coalition of NGOs demanding accountability for the deaths of migrants in the Central Mediterranean Sea while that region was
being tightly monitored by the NATO-led coalition intervening
in Libya. The efforts were focused on what is now known as the
first "left-to-die-boat" case, in which 63 migrants lost their lives
while drifting for 14 days within the NATO maritime surveillance area (see illustration below). For the first time, surveillance
technologies were used to reconstruct a detailed documentation:

IF: The conditions differ a lot across the different regions of the
Mediterranean. The distance from Turkey to Greece, for example, is just a few kilometres. Travellers in the zodiacs crossing the
Aegean are usually well equipped with smartphones. First, we find
out about their problem: Sometimes the engine is not working and
we can give advice. If people are stranded on an uninhabited island
or are in immediate distress, we ask them to send us their current
GPS-position via WhatsApp.
The distance to Europe in the Central Mediterranean Sea,
however, is very far. For the trip from Libya or Tunisia, people
need satellite phones to call us and to figure out their GPS position. Usually there is one phone per boat carrying an average of 150
or more people. The people who try to reach Europe via Morocco
to Spain – mostly from sub-Saharan Africa – need to pool money to buy small zodiacs – often even without engine. Crossing the
Strait of Gibraltar in a boat with 10 people is a perilous venture!

Mapping Safe Passages

61

It could be demonstrated with precision how different actors operating in the Central Mediterranean Sea were using the complex
and overlapping jurisdictions at sea to evade their responsibility
of rescuing people in distress. The report formed the basis for a
number of ongoing legal petitions filed against NATO member
states. The Forensic Oceanography project was further developed
into the monitoring platform Watch The Med. This public platform was launched in 2012 and lets anyone contribute to the map
by submitting their own reports of violations of migrants' rights at
sea. In the Alarmphone, we build on their experience and use the
mapping platform for our real-time interventions.
SL: The Alarmphone describes itself as an “alternative alarm-phone”
for people in distress in the Mediterranean Sea. What is the political
dimension of your work?
IF: All our work is based on the conviction that migration is not
a crime, and that state borders serve to prevent people from their
right to move around freely. The European Union's alleged fight
against smugglers and deaths at sea first of all serves their interest
to fight migration to Europe. We do not just answer emergency
calls and forward them to the coast guards but also give advice to

improve the situation of the boat people in emergency situations.
We inform about safety at sea in different languages via social media, we provide introductions in the use of the GPS function of
phones or how to act in cases of hypothermia. As soon as we know
the position of a boat, we inform the travellers in which SAR zone
they are located and which coast guard will probably rescue them.
While in the Western Mediterranean the coast guards of Spain
and Morocco cooperate closely, competences of the SAR actors
in the Aegean Sea are divided quite clearly. We inform the boats
about the consequences of an interception by coast guards from
Turkey or Morocco: People will be brought back to their countries
of departure. As we know that people will face the hell of deportation camps in Libya, we would never alert Libyan authorities - unless the boat people ask us to do so. If they wish to continue their
journey, we wait before calling the responsible authorities.
SL: Boat people send you their GPS locations, and you forward them to
state authorities to raise alarm. Where does the Alarmphone come in?
IF: The Alarmphone acts as a partial intermediary between boat
people and state authorities, i.e. the coast guards in the different
regions. As we sometimes experience that authorities listen more
carefully to us than to boat people, this means giving the latter a
voice or amplifying it. We are the only actor who not only calls the
boat people back to ask for their current situation on board but also
to calm them down in case of panic. We try to stay in touch with
the boats during the rescue operation and even after it has ended.
To be in direct communication enables us to learn about sudden
changes on the boat: On 15 April 2017, for example, we were informed about a boat in distress in the Central Mediterranean. We
spoke to the boat people over a period of more than 12 hours, before we lost contact. The engine did not work and water was entering the boat. We passed on their demands for rescue and updated
their GPS positions to the responsible authorities and supported
them throughout this difficult time. As weather conditions were
fine, the simultaneous departure of dozens of boats from the Libyan coasts were quite frequent those days, while only one Frontex
vessel was on duty. That Easter weekend, 8,360 people were rescued mainly by civil society rescue organisations. We scandalised
the EU's responsibility in the construction of this deadly void at
sea via social media – Facebook and Twitter –, press releases and
in cooperation with the involved NGO-vessels. We always inform
institutions like UNHCR by default about all of our cases, and we
contact journalists and organisations in the relevant regions. We
are careful in our decision whether to raise public alarm, though.
Beforehand, we try our best to urge the responsible authorities to
act by calling them repeatedly and by publishing current emergency cases via social media.
SL: How do you maintain a critical perspective towards state practices
in the Mediterranean in the long run?
IF: Our overall aim is to abolish (national) borders and migration control. We do not consider ourselves an additional service
provider to the coast guards but rather supporters of people who
claim their right to freedom of movement. We publish critical
statements about the current situation in the Mediterranean and

62

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

new developments on a regular basis. We scandalise the measures
of the European Union and Frontex to build and extend the fortress of Europe while claiming to fight smugglers and human trafficking. We are convinced that only open borders will put an end
to the smuggling business and all the calculated deaths at sea, as
they depend on borders and illegalised migration. In our work, we
experience every day how closely the worsening of the conditions
of flight is related to each time the migration regime gets tighter.
However, we are happy about every boat that reaches its intended
destination, although we are aware that crossing the Mediterranean Sea is only one small step towards a safe life in dignity.
SL: Maps are often criticised as always transmitting some political perspective. Why is it important for you to appropriate official maps and
conventions, and how do they serve your goals?
IF: Official conventions define national borders and responsibilities. They frame the work of the actors, like coast guards and
SAR vessels, as well as our own work. We fight for open borders
and freedom of movement for all. In order to support people in
distress, knowledge about a boat's current position in relation to
borderlines and rescue zones is crucial. This way, we can assess
whether human rights were violated by illegal state activities. The
map of watchthemed.net is special: It not only displays borders
defined by states, but also places of catastrophes and fatalities. If
you look at the map, you see many large red spots. The numbers
inside indicate the amount of reports in a specific region, so you
can immediately detect the deadliest areas and migration routes of
the Mediterranean.
SL: There are many discussions centering around participation and
democratic decision-making in crowd-maps. How do boat people participate in the Alarmphone?
IF: The Alarmphone network consists of about 150 activists
around the Mediterranean Sea who regularly do telephone shifts
and/or contribute to the project otherwise. Some of our members
have made the experience of crossing the Sea by boat themselves.
Now they are doing shifts to support other people's crossings or
contribute otherwise. Some of us live in Morocco or Tunisia,
which enables these members to do follow-ups of cases – another
important part of our work. For example, if people are sent back
illegally and arrested, they establish contact with the arrested or
their friends and families in order to find out what happened.
Some migrants finally decide to come to Europe, where we can
welcome them. The Alarmphone also offers advice regarding
safety at sea via different kinds of social media in many languages.
All our work is based strongly on the experiences of people who
were boat people at a particular moment of their lives.
SL: Thank you for the conversation.
IF: Thank you.

Closing Remarks: Rethinking Cartographic Critique

The Alarmphone is a particularly interesting example, as its everyday
work revolves around the appropriation of diverse maps, digital tools
and cartographic conventions. When receiving an emergency call,
this socio-material infrastructure allows the Alarmphone teams to
predict the outcome of actions they may take. To jointly make decisions, the Alarmphone and the boat people may establish and maintain communication in a way that is "imperceptible" (Papadopoulos
et al., 2008: 214) to coast guards and border patrols. Communicating
and mapping in real time thus become acts of subversion when they
make it possible to identify human rights abuses and small holes in
the European border regime apparatus and turn them into an immediate improvement of the boat peoples' situation.
The example of the Alarmphone offers new possibilities of describing cartographic critique. Moments of subversion are not to be
found in reinterpretations of cartographic conventions; rather, they
can be identified in the appropriation of maps and conventions and
their combination with other digital tools. Within these complex
assemblages, maps become a kind of organising tool for the flow of
data, bodies and boats and they help to identify the necessary means
and moments of subversive interventions (Cobarrubias & Pickles,
2009). Instead of a negative critique, these everyday cartographies
positively enable alternative geographical imaginations. Instead of
rejecting cartographic norms, the Alarmphone activists use digital
mapping platforms and their underlying essentialisms to gain temporary authorship over the territorial borders of Europe.
Endnotes
1. The name has been changed so that Ina can speak more openly about her
experiences with the Alarmphone, and to prevent possible criminalisation.
2. forensic-architecture.org/forensic-oceanography-addendum-report-left-die-boat/
References
Alarmphone 2014. For a ‘Watch the Med – Alarmphone’ for Boatpeople.
alarmphone.org/en/call, 12 January, 2017.
Alarmphone 2016. Moving On. One Year Alarmphone.
alarmphone.org/pt/intros/moving-on-6, 13 January 2018.
Heller, C. & Pezzani, L. 2014. Case: ‘Left-to-Die Boat’. In Forensic Architecture, ed.
Forensis. The Architecture of Public Truth. Berlin: Sternberg Press: 637-656.
Kasparek, B. & Speer, M. 2017. Of Hope. Ungarn und der Lange Sommer der
Migration. bordermonitoring.eu/ungarn/2015/09/of-hope, 12 January 2017.
Map Mos Maiorum 2014. Closing Statement: Documenting Racist Controls with
Mapping Software. map.nadir.org/ushahidi/page/index/8 12, January 2017.
Monroy, M. 2017. Staatsanwaltschaft Ermittelt gegen Refugee-Konvoi und Fluchthilfe-Webseite. cilip.de/2015/11/06/staatsanwaltschaft-ermittelt-gegen-refugee-konvoi-und-fluchthilfe-webseite, 12 January 2017.
Illustrations
Map: Screenshot of watchthemed.net with red dots showing the number of
cases in each region and with red-lined search and rescue zones.
Photograph on previous spread by Leona Goldstein: Two Alarmphone members during shift work.
Graphic on previous spread by Watch the Med: Model of the drifting “left-todie-boat“.
Graphics on opposite page by Alarmphone: A boat that has been localised
and contextualised via the mapping platform watchthemed.net within international territorial demarcations.

Mapping Safe Passages

63

64

65

Militarization of Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas

Measuring Impacts on the Lives of Young Black Men and Women through Social Cartography

Fórum de Juventudes do Rio de Janeiro1
facebook: Fórum de Juventudes do Rio de Janeiro

66

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

A young woman, identified only as Carolina, was going to school
when the police raided her house. Grassroots communicators
were violently prevented from doing their work and recording police operations in the favelas occupied by the Pacifying Police Unit
(UPP) in Rio de Janeiro, which is a sign of the criminalization of
social movements and dictatorial control of territories. Children
play in fear of the noise coming from the helicopter of BOPE, Rio
de Janeiro's military police special operation unit. This is a special battalion of the police force known for its brutal methods and
interventions in the favelas. Its symbol and main instrument are,
respectively, a skull and an armoured black vehicle called caveirão
(which literally means "big skull"). Claudia Ferreira was shot in
Morro da Congonha, and her body was dragged by the police in
a case that shocked the city in 2014. Since then, dozens of other
young residents from the favelas and peripheries have been killed
by police officers, making fear a common feeling in places where
the State presence through militarization has become yet another
form of institutional violence. All these cases were mapped out as
part of the project "Militarization of the Favelas: The Impacts on
the Lives of Young Black Men and Women of the Youth Forum
of Rio de Janeiro", held in 15 favelas of the state of Rio de Janeiro:
Maré, Complexo do Alemão, Manguinhos, Jacarezinho, Rocinha,
Vidigal, Santa Marta, Vila Kennedy, Providência, São Jorge/Campo Grande and Acari, all in the city of Rio de Janeiro, as well as
Santo Cristo in Niteroi, São Bernardo in Belford Roxo, Jardim Primavera in Duque de Caxias and Engenho in Itaguaí.
The project was based on the social cartography methodology so
that participants were able to develop ways of identifying, mapping and georeferencing rights violations committed mainly by
the State against residents of the favelas and peripheries in Rio,
in which black people make up the majority of the population. In
total, 153 young people participated throughout the course of the
entire project. Through speeches, illustrations and debates, the
project was able to emphasize the institutionalized racism and war
logic that constitute the State presence in these territories.
In this context, social cartography was chosen as an instrument of struggle by the Youth Forum of Rio de Janeiro. The Youth
Forum represents a space in which young people, predominantly
black residents of the favelas and peripheral neighbourhoods, can
speak up in order to confront the genocide of black youth, institutionalized racism, violence against women, homophobia, lesbophobia, and transphobia.
Therefore, the objective of this project was to map out violations that go far beyond the geographical aspects traditionally
being made visible. The use of social cartography aimed at breaking an imposed silence on local narratives about the impact of
militarization in the lives of the favela residents. The project's
participants were young black men and women between the ages
of 14 and 29 years, which represents the age group most affected by violence. In Brazil, young black people are 2.5 times more
likely to be murdered than young white people. This data is from
2015 and was published by the Brazilian Forum on Public Security, in cooperation with UNESCO and the National Secretariat
for Youth. Unlike in a Democratic State of Law, violence in the
favelas is not an exception to the rule. According to the Institute
of Public Security, which reports to the Secretariat of Security of

Rio 497 (or 77%) of the 644 people killed
as a result of police actions in the state
of Rio de Janeiro in 2015 were black or
dark-skinned. However, it is important to note that, although high, this
number still does not correspond to
reality since one major problem is the
underreporting of cases.

Method

The first step of the project was to hold workshops in the many
participating favelas. The people responsible for the workshops
were local partners and members of the Youth Forum who were
trained on the New Social Cartography of the Amazon methodology and acted as facilitators. These are residents of favelas and
peripheries that, for years, have been immersed in and actively
contributing to urban debates on the genocide of black youth and
other rights violations. On the basis of this engagement, the Youth
Forum proposed the following themes for discussion in the social
cartography: institutional racism, the right to the city and the very
mapping constructions.
The project's supporters promoted the workshops. Each workshop was conducted in order to foster an open dialogue on the issues mentioned above. The goal was to stimulate the debate and
interventions as part of the cartography construction process,
which would be carried out by the young people involved. Each
theme was explored in an open debate in discussion groups. The
first step was to facilitate the free expression of participants, who
were able to use various forms of communication to present their
views, experiences, and ideas to change this reality.
Each workshop had its specific goals and themes, but all of them
were conducted in accordance with the proposal to deconstruct
the word "map". At each meeting the articulators first worked on
the concept of "map" that young people had had in their mind until then. After that the notion of map was presented as something
that is also built from a particular perspective and from the daily
experiences of those who will use it to express themselves. The
methodology followed was the New Social Cartography of the
Amazon, one of the main subject references in the Latin American Region, especially in Brazil.
After the first moments of debate and open dialogue, the participants were invited to illustrate their own favelas through drawings, comics, speeches and other forms of expression. The experience showed that different kinds of expressions complemented
each other. What might have been overlooked in certain kinds of
speech was manifested through drawings, debates, music and so
on. Some of the participants identified mostly with drawings, cartoons and collages. At the same time there were those who preferred to express themselves through musical styles, photographs,
videos, etc. The project opened itself up to all of these communication tools which, throughout the process, were used as recording methods.

Militarization of Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas

67

Gradually the favelas revealed themselves on paper, with elements
that are usually overlooked and hidden within traditional maps.
These included such things as the local youth gathering venues,
the courts where parties, soirees and debates are held, football
fields, day care centres and schools. Those are all elements that are
often invisible in the favela representations created by outsiders.
The maps also showed NGOs working in the favelas and places
where people meet commonly. At the same time, the participants
also pointed out drug trading spots; the favela access points where
the police often carry out degrading searches, making people feel
violated on a daily basis, places where women suffered violence,
homes raided by UPP officers and so on.
The objective was to collectively build another geographical perspective that would also work as the basis for the affirmation and claim of
rights. After that the material was assembled in a final project report.

Next Steps

After the initial gathering of information, the project is at the stage
of building a virtual geo-referenced database of the themes and
situations exposed during the process described. The first result is
a mobile phone app for denouncing the different forms of police
violence which people in the favelas and peripheries of Rio de Janeiro suffer from. Created by the Youth Forum of Rio de Janeiro,
and based on the social cartographic project, the app #NósporNós
(meaning "by Us for Us") can be downloaded by anyone using a
smartphone (via Playstore).
The app went live in March of 2016 and has already registered over
138 complaints. The most common complaints are the abuse of power, invasions of homes, torture and racism. The app has a support
network composed of the Centre for Human Rights of the Public
Defender's Office of Rio de Janeiro State, the Public Ministry and
NGOs such as Global Justice, Amnesty International and IBASE.
Complaints are forwarded to the relevant bodies. The purpose of
the app is simple: Anyone can submit a violation of rights occurring
in the city. The purpose is to map out the amount of rights violations
carried out by the State and to also understand the nature of these
actions. Thus, people are free to detail the violations as much as they
want. In addition, some cases are beginning to be sent directly to the
Public Ministry of Rio de Janeiro, which will have the responsibility
of defining a possible investigation. It is worth mentioning that the
Brazilian Human Rights Fund supported the creation of the application, which facilitated the initial communication and dissemination. As a result, during the first 6 months an average of one to three
complaints arrived per day via the app. While all of these were reported to the Public Ministry, the immense workload of the Youth
Forum prevented the representation of all of them in the map of the
application. After this initial phase and with the expiration of the
support of the Human Rights Fund, it became difficult to continue
promoting the app, which resulted in a decrease of denunciations.
The general feeling is that from now on the social cartography
method has entered the routine of the Youth Forum of Rio de Janeiro as a new fighting tool for the favela residents of the city.
Translation by Rodrigo Calvet and Ana Luiza Lopes

68

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Endnotes
1. Text by Fransérgio Goulart, Marina Ribeiro, Leticia Maione
and Camila Nobrega.
Illustrations
Photograph previous spread by Luiz Baltar
Illustration previous spread by Youth Forum of Rio de Janeiro: logo of the
mobile phone app “NósporNós”
Photograph this page by Youth Forum of Rio de Janeiro: using NósporNós
Photograph opposite page by Luiz Baltar
Map by Youth Forum of Rio de Janeiro

Militarization of Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas

69

Political Action Maps

Finding your Way in Demonstrations and Protests

Kartographische Aktion
aktionskarten.noblogs.org

72

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Social movements often take place in public space: during demonstrations and other political actions people move along streets,
paths and sometimes cross-country. Often, when we want to
reach places, we are denied entrance. And only rarely do we have
the opportunity to protest on familiar terrain close to our homes.
Thus, the need for maps focusing on protest becomes obvious.
Especially during protests which aim to achieve more than
just walking along a police-approved demo-route, independent and spontaneous orientation is essential.
In Germany, for example, there are regularly recurring protests for the purpose of stopping
Nazi demonstrations, demonstrating against
ecologically destructive surface mining or to
disturbing the transport of atomic waste.
Often the concept of the protest is to decentralize and to carry out different actions in different places at the same time.
Participating groups and individuals can
either rely on others and follow along – or
they can organize themselves independently
and hereby create a more powerful protest.
In order to achieve this kind of autonomy,
you will need a political action map. Such a map
shows important contact points, landmarks, demo-routes and protests in their surrounding area. If,
during a protest, up-to-date information is broadcast via live
ticker, cellphone, smartphone or radio, this information can be
referenced on the map. This way, ideally everybody knows where
they have to go. Additionally, useful infrastructure can be included on the map: Is there a store somewhere close by? Where is the
closest public toilet? In case of serious confrontations, the locations of pharmacies and hospitals are useful. If available, other information like live ticker websites or phone numbers of information hotlines, street medics and legal aid services, etc., could also
be provided in a corner of the map.

Political Action Maps in Practice
Distribution and Creation

Political action maps are often used in demonstrations and protests in Germany – we don't know about the situation elsewhere
(please tell us if you do). Some of these maps are made by Kartographische Aktion. Organizers of protests contact us, explaining that they could use a map, and we provide one for them, as
a kind of demonstration service, so to speak, just like there are
collectives for loudspeaker vans or protest medics. The organizers print the maps themselves and distribute them on-site. Most
of the maps are also made available online for self-printing. We
regularly provide maps for the groups we are in close contact with.
Others have seen our maps during a protest and have contacted
us for their next event. During the last six years we have created
about 90 maps, mainly for anti-fascist protests, but also for anti-capitalist as well as ecological and feminist event days. Thus,
creating maps has become a part of our political work. We support
others with whatever we can contribute. This also works over a
distance, which is especially useful for groups in remote and rural
areas that would normally receive less outside support than urban

movements. So far we have had to decline only few requests and
only because it was impossible to make a map on time.
But how do you go about creating such a map? Most of our
maps are made on the basis of OpenStreetMap (OSM), a free
online map or rather a map database. At least in central Europe,
the map data has such a high quality that it outperforms even the
official maps. There are dedicated programs that enable you to
make "normal" maps from OSM-Data which are in turn
enriched with additional information through image editing programs. Over the last years we have
standardized and optimized our sequence and
written scripts to automate certain steps. This
has reduced our workload immensely: While
having needed up to two days working on
a (bad) map previously, today some maps
require only two to three hours of work.
And they have become much better along
the way.
This steady and "functional" approach
probably also explains why the maps appear so simple and look so much alike. They
all have the same set of rather neutral-looking
icons, symbols and markings. The style is a compromise between the technical feasibility of presenting as much graphical information as possible on a
small, reasonably priced and handy piece of paper without covering important information, such as street names or markings.
Who knows what might become relevant on the streets later on?
Some people only need the layout of big streets while others want
to know the quickest way to get through an array of garden plots or
which shortcuts and beaten tracks are available. All in all, the map
follows the model of traditional city maps.

The Maps of the Future
Decentralized and in Real Time?

Meanwhile, we have begun efforts to enable others to create their
own political action maps. Decentralization, distribution of skills
and self-determination always lead to improvement. The means
and tools of map-making are increasingly available for free. Technological hurdles are being lowered and becoming less and less
of a problem for more and more people over time. That is why
we have published some instructions for making political action
maps on our blog.
At this point, the emancipatory potential of free software and
geodata developed in the last years is becoming apparent. Only a
few years ago, creating your own maps was simply not feasible in
Germany, especially for rural regions. The coverage of OSM-Data
was initially so patchy that for a functional map it was simply unusable. Instead, proprietary and inflexible topographic maps had
to be utilized. In other regions of the planet, OSM provides the
first possibility whatsoever to get access to useful map material.
With growing coverage, more and more possibilities arise to make
use of the data for one's own purposes.
With a growing proliferation of online applications, smartphones and mobile internet, the question arises: What could
political action maps look like in the future? There are already

Political Action Maps

73

approaches and attempts to work with digital live maps that cover the ongoing situation
during protests on the smartphone. In some
actions, for example, the map crowdsourcing tool Ushahidi is used, by means of which
many people can independently add information to a map. In Berlin, the app Gegen Nazis
was developed, which illustrates the routes
of Neo-Nazis and counter-protests for a few
demonstrations. There is still great potential
in this field, but a general development is on
the horizon: The dynamic of such situations
could be portrayed much better in live maps.
These could help making the current situation
more distinguishable and allow for a more
spontaneous reaction.
Upgraded police units also utilize such
systems to control or suppress protest events.
This and a number of other new problems
have to be considered. The authorities can, for
example, try to use internal protest communication for their own purposes. The widespread use of cell phones and smartphones
is already being utilized by law enforcement
agencies to gather information about the
protests and their participants. In Germany,
cases have been made known in which the
police have investigated identities of people
in proxmity to protest marches, have gathered
detailed call records as well as created movement profiles and gathered the contents of cell
phone communication. If protests are made to
depend on mobile devices, this also facilitates
the possibilities of surveillance for the authorities. Moreover, participative, dynamic maps
could be manipulated (e.g. by the police or
other participating groups) or used to predict
the movements of protesters.
Nonetheless, political action maps remain an emancipatory means to support
protests – on paper or on screen. The future will show us yet more and easier ways
to enable everybody to orientate themselves in public spaces during protests.
Create maps and use them to make change!
Translation by koriander
Illustrations
Map by Kartographische Aktion. Special thanks to the
OSM contributors.
This map was originally published in German and has
been translated for its publication here.

Political Action Maps

75

This Land Is Your Land

Strategies for Making the Potential Commons Visible and Actionable

596 Acres – Paula Z. Segal, Mara Kravitz
596acres.org

76

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Identifying Objects to Be Considered1

To shape the dreams and demands of people living in cities yearning for collaborative creative spaces in which to fulfill the needs
of their communities, we start by mapping government-owned
land and buildings. Our maps show the abundant potential of
our shared spaces hiding in plain sight, aching for collaborative
management and care. We then connect those maps with tools
and strategies understandable to residents of the places we have
drawn. We put up signs, we answer the phone, we provide scripts,
examples and a community of collaboration. The maps are the
starting place for the emergence of true commons to replace warehoused public real estate assets.
There are approximately 660 acres of vacant public land in New
York City, distributed across 1,800 vacant lots (596 Acres, 2016).
These lots could be gardens, play spaces and sites of community
gathering and cultural activity. Located primarily in low-income
communities of color, these potential public spaces sit vacant,
locked and forgotten, abscesses in the very neighborhoods that
most need healthy resources. These gaps only compound a history
of redlining, urban renewal clearance and municipal neglect.
As New York City's community land access program, 596
Acres helps neighbors organize around and gain access to the
city's vacant land. We combine sophisticated online tools and
grassroots outreach to turn municipal data into information useful to the public, help neighbors navigate city politics and connect
neighborhood organizers to one another through social networking and in-person collaboration. The 596 Acres model is driven by
a belief in data-driven, inclusive and democratic local power that
is scalable to citywide and statewide issues around environmental
justice and public space. In the last four years, through the information we have provided and our direct support, residents have
replaced 36 vacant lots with vibrant community spaces.

Mapping What Is Already Ours

The 596 Acres team started in 2011 by hunting down the available
information about vacant city-owned land in New York City. We
first had to rely on access to City data that was behind a paywall
blocking it off from general public access via an academic center
at a local college. Realizing that crucial information was being kept
from the communities that needed it most, in 2012 we collaborated
with other advocates to successfully pressure the City to release the
data for free. We also comb the NYC Open Data portal and other
city agency and non-profit organizations' records for information
relevant to government-owned property in New York City.
We translate the data into information describing the world
as New Yorkers actually experience it, beginning with the very
definition of a "vacant" property. The NYC Department of City
Planning lumps community gardens, slivers of lots between buildings, and actual publically-accessible vacant lots together under
the same VACANT code. After using an automated script, a staff
person looking at online records of each property and a survey
of community gardens done by gardeners to untangle this, we
are certain that our online map shows public land that is actually vacant lots a regular person would understand as being vacant:
fenced, full of garbage and weeds and stray cats and discarded
weapons (596 Acres, 2016).

The map goes a step further to connect these neglected spaces with the decisions that led to their present state and the
decision-makers that have some power to change their future. Some of the decisions were made through a process of "urban renewal"2 in the last century. Understanding
that the urban renewal plans weigh heavily on what we see
in our neighborhoods today but not being able to find data describing the plans in machine-readable form, we used New York
State's Freedom of Information Law to request decades of planning documents that we read and then translated into data tables
we can map and connect with particular properties.

Open Data Becomes Open Space

The key to our success in transforming open data into community-managed open space is that we put information on the fences
that surround vacant lots. The online map allows us to figure out
what information to put on signs. Our signs announce clearly that
the land is public and that neighbors, together, can work towards
permission to transform the lot into a garden, park or farm. Both
the online map and in-place signs list the city's parcel identifier,
which agency has control over that property and information about
the individual property manager handling the parcel for the agency.
Each group of residents must navigate a unique bureaucratic
maze: applying for approval from the local Community Board,
winning endorsement from local elected officials, and negotiating
with whichever agency holds title to the land. The signs and the
online map both connect organizers to the staff of 596 Acres, who
steer and support residents through organizing support, legal advice and technical assistance.
We work with each unique situation to figure out what is possible and then help people achieve it: Often campaigns end in a
permanent transfer to the NYC Parks Department, but sometimes
a temporary space for a few years, until other planned development moves forward, is the only achievable outcome.
596 Acres acts in a supporting and advocacy role during each
campaign but ultimately each space is managed autonomously,
transformed and maintained by volunteer neighbors and local
community partners as spaces to gather, grow food and play. Each
one gives people an opportunity to shape the city, practice civic
participation and self-government, and become co-creators with
their fellow New Yorkers.
596 Acres facilitates neighbors building political power by connecting with one another. We do not remain abstracted on the internet or limited by only having face-to-face meetings. By bridging modalities, we have the ability to connect New Yorkers with
different strengths and who represent different groups. Online,
people can sign up to organize a particular local lot, and then receive updates when others sign up or post. The online tool helps
neighbors connect even before getting access to an actual place to
build together. However, not everybody we work with ever sees
the online tool; many interact in person or over the phone with
our staff and simply give us permission to add their information
so others can find them.

This Land Is Your Land

77

Data in Action

While New York City politicians rhetorically prioritize urban agriculture and public space, 596 Acres actually fills the gap between
place and the people in our neighborhoods. 596 Acres sees – and
teaches others to see – empty spaces as sites of opportunity, both
for potential green spaces in neighborhoods that lack them, and
as focal points for community organizing and civic engagement.
In January 2015, when the City published a list of 181
"hard-to-develop" properties they were willing to sell for $1 to
housing developers to build pretty expensive housing, we analyzed
the list and found out that it included 18 community gardens, six
of which had formed through our support. We published a map
and called the impacted gardeners, tapping into and expanding
our network, while arming the impacted residents with the tools
to advocate for the preservation of the existing community spaces
(see map at the end of the article).
Within three weeks, over 150 New Yorkers, including four
City Council members, rallied on the steps of City Hall (Tortorello, 2015). A year-long campaign followed. It included Community Planning Boards, City Council and advocates in every level of
the administration. On 30 December 2015 the NYC Departments
of Parks and Housing Preservation and Development agreed to
permanently preserve fifteen of the gardens on the for-sale list;
community pressure was so great that the announcement extended to community spaces that were not even on-offer to developers in January: In total, 36 community spaces were permanently
preserved as a result of information-driven advocacy – the fourth
wave of major garden preservation successes in NYC history.

78

Counter-Cartographies as a Tool for Action

Beyond NYC's Vacant Lots

Bridging disposition strategies for public resources and the cooperative projects that emerge when these strategies result in
community access to land interrupts the narrative of scarcity that
permeates all conceptions of real estate and allows neighbors to
collectively shape their cities. Strategies derived from the success
of 596 Acres have emerged in nearly a dozen cities worldwide, including Los Angeles, Montreal and Melbourne (596 Acres, 2016).
In Philadelphia the local incarnation, groundedinphilly.org, was a
necessary precondition for the recognition of land stewards and
urban agriculture practitioners as an existing constituency whose
needs must be considered as that city creates a new protocol for
the disposition of public land. Making the potential of abundant
vacant public land visible, beginning with mapping, gets the most
impacted people into the center of decision-making about our
shared resources, inspiring tangible grassroots change well beyond the boundaries of neighborhood vacant lots.
The "Right to the City", as first articulated by Henri Lefebvre
in 1968, recognizes the urban environment as a work of art constantly being made anew by its inhabitants, a space of encounter
that allows differences to flourish and generates the contemporary conditions for creative human communities. The right to the
city is the right to influence the urban environment that will, inevitably, shape those that spend their days in it. It is really a right
to personal autonomy and community self-determination. Our
maps are the gateway to the collective, creative acts that shape urban places. They make expressing the right to the city possible for
everyday people.

Endnotes
1. “Maps don’t merely represent space, they shape arguments; they set
discursive boundaries and identify objects to be considered.”
(Institute for Applied Autonomy, 2008)
2. In 1949 the United States Congress started a federal urban redevelopment program, or “urban renewal,“ which provided resources to
municipal “blight clearance.“ Federal money was made available to local
redevelopment authorities to buy and clear so-called “blighted“ areas
and then sell that land to private developers. The program followed
federal redlining – which distributed access to loans for homeowners
along explicitly racial lines – by a decade and was deployed in nearly the
same neighborhoods as the ones that had been declared too integrated
for safe investment in the housing stock. Urban renewal faciliated the
clearance of neighborhoods in which people of different races lived side
by side in American Cities between the World Wars.

References
596 Acres. Living Lots NYC.
livinglotsnyc.org, 4 February 2016.
596 Acres. Other Cities Copy.
596acres.org/about/other-cities-copy, 14 January 2018.
Institute for Applied Autonomy 2008. Tactical Cartographies. In Mogel, L. &
Bhagat, A., eds. An Atlas of Radical Cartography. Journal of Aesthetics &
Protest Press: 29-37. cril.mitotedigital.org/node/352, 14 January 2018.
Lefebvre, H. 1996. Writings on Cities. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Tortorello, M. 2015. In Community Gardens, a New Weed? nytimes.
com/2015/02/12/garden/in-community-gardens-a-new-weed.html, 14
January 2018.
Illustrations
Photograph this page top by Murray Cox: The Electric Ladybug Garden
Photograph this page bottom by Murray Cox: The Free Black Women’s
Library

This Land Is Your Land

79

Counter-Cartographies
Tie Networks

X-Ray of Soy Agribusiness in the Pampa
and Mega-Mining in the Andes
1

Iconoclasistas – Julia Risler, Pablo Ares
iconoclasistas.net

86

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

We are a duo formed in 2006. We combine graphic art, creative
workshops and collective research to produce activist resources
that can be circulated, used and appropriated freely. Through
designing and carrying out workshops, we seek to strengthen the
communication between activists, to set up networks of solidarity
and affinity, and to promote collaborative practices of resistance
and transformation. Through this dynamic web of affinity and
solidarity, built by sharing and promoting open projects and collective workshops in Argentina, Latin America and Europe, our
practice keeps on spreading.
We share our resources and practical experience on our website
in order to not only set them free from barriers of private property but also from economic, physical and geographic restrictions.
The website works as a multimedia support in order to spread
and share the material we produce and to foster its appropriation
through creative commons licenses. Resources uploaded to the
web for reappropriation, reproduction and redefinition turn this
virtual means into a collective tool through which hierarchies are
dismantled and exchange is stimulated. In consequence, users become producers recurring to liberated production.
Creating resources for their free circulation as well as their
particular drifts and reappropriations has transformed and broadened our practice. Constant exchange with and relations to other
collectives, organizations and social movements has promoted a
reciprocal influence encouraging us to incorporate new approaches, resources and topics. These have led us to rethink the way in
which materials circulate, how strategies spread and how we
engage in collective constructions. This political, affective and
creative network gave way to itinerant exhibitions, collaborative
creation workshops, new ludic resources and the participation in
meetings with cultural organizations and social movements.

About the Maps

Between 2008 and 2010 we travelled across Argentina, setting
up workshops in various cities of different provinces by contacting university students as well as cultural and communicational
groups. In these spaces topics for collective reflection emerged.
They were thoroughly analyzed and expanded when we participated in the 10th and 11th session of the Citizen Assemblies Union
(UAC) in Jujuy and Córdoba, as well as in four meetings organized
by the popular education collective Pañuelos en Rebeldía in Bariloche, Tucumán, El Dorado (Misiones) and in Ciudad del Este
(Paraguay). During these sessions and meetings a heterogeneous
group of social movements, social and environmental assemblies,
organizations of peasants and native peoples, neighbors and citizens for the defense of common goods participated in creating accounts, marking situations and rendering visible the various types
of organization and resistance of communities. During the first
two days of the sessions in Jujuy we assembled a booth displaying maps and cards so that participants could approach the desk to
share their knowledge about conflicts and resistances taking place
within the different regions in Argentina. During the third and
last day a map was presented. This map was systematized and depicted the following question: Keeping in mind that we were designing a map to be circulated in public, should we also depict the
resistances and achievements of organizations? This dilemma was

positively resolved in a second session in Córdoba when dozens
of representatives of assemblies and communities, after having
corrected and verified data, voted on the importance of rendering
visible resistances in the maps of the public domain by a show of
hands. After the systematization of these meetings two major issues were identified:
The Model of Agribusiness
and the Consequences to Transgenic Monoculture
A complex issue, which emerged in the workshops organized in
the city of Córdoba, Rosario (Santa Fe) and the districts of Morón,
La Plata, San Andrés de Giles, Olavarría, Tandil and Bahía Blanca, among others. These mappings revealed a type of agricultural
production concentrated within a few hands and produced with
a technological package consisting of machines, transgenic seeds,
herbicides and highly toxic and polluting pesticides (see map on
opposite page).
Open Pit Mega-Mining
This topic in particular emerged during the workshops organized
in districts close to the Andes. In this case mappings evidenced
the business of multinational corporations (primarily Chinese
and Canadian companies) and the ways in which they penetrate
districts, are poorly regulated by the State and are tolerated by the
political branch. The mappings furthermore revealed the types
of exploitation in mountain areas and the separation of minerals
through a toxic process using big amounts of water, polluting air
and water, damaging landscapes and ecosystems and harming the
rights and the health of inhabitants and communities (see map at
the end of the article).

"The Map Is Not the Territory"2

When we talk about local territories, we don't just mean the physical space in which we find ourselves, but also the social body and
rebel subjectivities. Mapmaking is one of the principal tools employed by the dominant powers to appropriate territories for utilitarian purposes. This happens not just as a form of spatial planning but also to set borders that define new occupations and plan
strategies of invasion, plunder and appropriation of communal
property. As such, the maps commonly circulating in our societies
are based on a vision that is imposed onto territories by the dominant powers in order to create hegemonic representations of space.
These are functional to the development of the capitalist model,
rationally decoding the land, classifying natural resources, demographic characteristics and the type of production that can most
effectively transform labor power and resources into capital.
But the map is not the territory. A connection with a particular
territory is established through processes of interpretation, feelings and personal experiences. Maps are not the territory because
they are unable to account for the subjectivity of the territorial
processes, symbolic representations and imaginations inherent to
them and the constant mutability and changes they are subject to.

X-Ray of Soy Agribusiness in the Pampa and Mega-Mining in the Andes

87

In that Case, Why Work with Maps?

To harness a tool that enables us to collectively create critical narratives and in order to share inputs for the creation of emancipatory practices. In the workshops we use tools that allow us to
collectively create complex scenarios, deepen critical approaches
and encourage alert and active subjectivities. These are essential
if we are to protect common property, fight against processes of
colonization and privatization of the public sphere, and establish
new worlds.
Maps as Part of an Ever-Moving Collective Process
We shouldn't forget that maps are tools that capture a snapshot
of a particular moment, but they cannot completely describe the
complex, problematic territorial reality that they are based on.
Rather, a map transmits a particular collective idea of a dynamic
and ever-changing territory in which the real and symbolic borders are constantly affected by the perceptions and actions of bodies and subjectivities. Maps have to be part of a bigger process, one
of many strategies, a means to foster thinking, to socialize knowledge and practices, to boost collective participation, to work with
strangers, to swap experiences, to challenge hegemonic spaces, to
promote creation and imagination, to probe specific issues, to visualize resistances and to point out power relationships…

88

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

Endnotes
1. Parts of this text appeared as “Iconoclasistas. Critical mapping, collaborative practices and open source graphic resources” online (de.scribd.com/document/202343141/Iconoclasistas-Critical-mapping-collaborative-practices-and-open-source-graphic-resources)
This article and all its illustrations are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License (CC BY-NCSA 4.0).
2. This phrase is attributed to Alfred Korzybski (a Polish aristocrat and
founder of general semantics), who apparently coined it after his experience as an officer in World War I, when he led a disastrous attack
in which his soldiers ended up falling into a pit that was not marked
on the map. Gregory Bateson (a North American anthropologist and
linguist) completed the phrase by adding “and the name is not the thing
named.” What they both sought to express was the impossibility of
objectifying the significant, emotional dimensions of spaces and linguistic
representations.

X-Ray of Soy Agribusiness in the Pampa and Mega-Mining in the Andes

89

91

Mapping Global Environmental Conflicts and Spaces of Resistance
Environmental Justice Atlas – Leah Temper
ejatlas.org

92

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

The environmental movement has been described as "the most
comprehensive and influential movement of our time" (Castells,
1997: 67), representing for the "post-industrial" age what the workers' movement was for the industrial period. While strike statistics
have been collected for many countries since the late nineteenth
century and are currently tracked by the World Labour Organization, until the beginning of this research project there has been no
attempt to track the occurrence and frequency of mobilizations
related to environmental issues. The Global Atlas of Environmental Justice (EJ Atlas) was conceived to address this gap. The
EJ Atlas traces the outline of an emerging global movement for
Environmental Justice through its localized manifestations (Martinez-Alier et al., 2016). It currently documents over 2100 cases of
ecological conflicts around the world (as of May 2017). Each point
in the atlas represents one conflict, defined as local mobilization
or protest against an environmentally destructive activity or policy. Each case or data-sheet, is documented by an organization or
an activist scholar involved in the resistance. Each case outlines
the history, actors, impacts, claims and outcomes of the conflict
and also provides photos, references, and links (for a description
of the project see Temper et al., 2015).

Aims of the EJ Atlas

The atlas aims to make visible protests against environmental
pollution and degradation through participatory counter-hegemonic cartography involving scholar-activists, civil society and
academics. By telling the stories of those fighting on the ground
to preserve the environment, we aim to show that these grassroots
activists on the front lines are putting forward a vision for a truly
sustainable economy. Unfortunately, for this work they are often also putting their lives on the line. As Global Witness (2016)
reports, environmental activists were murdered at a rate of 3 per
week last year. This makes bringing attention to these struggles all
the more urgent.
The atlas is also a contribution to understanding the drivers and
interconnections between conflicts on a global scale. Most research on such conflicts is undertaken at either the case study level
or sometimes at a national or regional level and focuses on specific areas or activities. The EJ Atlas offers a tool for meta-analysis
that can transcend individual cases in order to identify patterns,
relationships among cases and actors and how such conflicts are
shaped by the larger political economy.
In addition to the global scale, the methodology for data gathering
is also a unique aspect of the EJ Atlas. Environmental Justice was
a community-led science from the beginning. By drawing on the
concept of activist knowledge, the harvest of data in the mapping
process was carried out by the communities themselves, as a form
of citizen science and popular epidemiology (Escobar, 2008). In
fact, as many researchers in EJ studies engage with communities
through processes of Participatory Action and Collaborative Research (Bacon et al., 2013), such forms of engagement attempt to
more actively include communities in the process of knowledge
production. The researchers hereby recognize the communities
as producers of knowledge in their own right rather than merely

objects of study (Casas-Cortés et al., 2008). There is a need for
developing "science with the people" rather than for the people,
especially in those fields characterized by "irreducible uncertainties and ethical complexities" (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1994: 198).
As such, this research is not focused on studying a movement or
a specific group of people, but to study together with them and
based on an "ecology of knowledges", as Boaventura de Souza
Santos (2007) suggests. While needs of collaboration are often
acknowledged both by scholars and activists, so far there was not
a space of interaction enabling collaborative research on EJ conflicts on a global scale. This is precisely what the EJ Atlas collaborative Research Initiative advocates.
The EJ Atlas mapping process has further sought to integrate the
knowledge of several already existing platforms in order to draw
on previous work from both activists and scholars. These initiatives include the Map of Environmental Injustice in Brazil, supported by the Fundacio Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), the Centro
di Documentazione sui Conflitti Ambientali (CDCA), the Latin
American Observatory of Mining Conflicts (OCMAL), Genetic Resources Action International (GRAIN), World Rainforest
Movement (WRM) and Oilwatch. These initiatives continue to
support and document community struggles globally against extractivism, mining, tree plantations, deforestation and, fossil fuel
extraction and towards food and energy sovereignty as well as climate and Environmental Justice.

The EJ Atlas:
A Living Document and a Tool for Extending
the Practice and Theory of Environmental Justice

The unit of analysis is a well-documented project-based campaign
or place-based struggle, which sometimes results in influential
national protest events or broader campaigns. These contestations are made visible through press reports and court cases, campaigning, petitions, meetings, demonstrations, boycotts, strikes,
threats, civil disobedience, collective violence and other action
forms. For each conflict, two or three pages of detailed information are available, as reported by over 100 collaborators at present,
from Environmental Justice Organizations (EJOs) or academics
and graduate students working on the ground or from secondary
sources about that issue. A laborious moderation process, facilitated by the Institute of Environmental Science and Technology
(ICTA) and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), assures
quality and consistency of each entry before being published online (for more details see Temper et al., 2015).
The form, conceived after several decades of research on extractive industries and related conflictivity and collaboration with
activist groups, is framed around the type of activity, commodity
extracted and actors involved (companies, international or finance
institutions, etc.). It focuses on the project itself, on the features
of the mobilization, resistance or campaign, on the impacts and
on the outcomes. The initial form has been slightly adjusted and
improved during the lifespan of the mapping project, following
advice and feedback from activists through an iterative process.
This highlights how the EJ Atlas is a living document and a tool

Mapping Global Environmental Conflicts and Spaces of Resistance

93

that can be adapted to new needs during its implementation and
use. At the end of the project it can be said to be one of the most
exhaustive databases with more than 100 fields, including both
multi-choice and free text boxes.
The EJ Atlas has been used widely by teachers as a pedagogical
tool for teaching environmental issues from high school to the
post-graduate level, by activists for organizing and campaigning,
by journalists and researchers and by policy-makers and governments, among many others. Furthermore, the EJ Atlas provides
empirical material for a research agenda that contributes to understanding how inequalities are shaped through socio-metabolic
transformations in the economy, how they are contested and to
what outcomes. The EJ Atlas holds significant promise for extending both the practice and theory of Environmental Justice and
geographical scholarship through certain aspects:
•
•

•

By integrating further activist knowledge into analysis to
contribute to the theoretical development of EJ and through
new forms of knowledge co-production.
Through a multi-scale framework that allows a wider
geographical analysis of relationships and interconnections
between actors, struggles as well as financial and energetic
flows. Such a framework can help discern the coalitions of
power that produce and benefit from prevailing patterns of
production and consumption. It can also highlight the groups
that suffer the most and in doing so provide a useful point of
departure for constructing coalitions or policy-based interventions in order to protect the rights of vulnerable groups.
A geographical perspective that through geo-location and
cartographic data allows an interface between the natural and
social sciences, by integrating features of the territory and
social, institutional and cultural processes into social analysis.

Outcomes: Collaborative Featured Maps

After collecting so much information about conflicts and resistances across scattered locations, there is a need to make sense to
those dots and their interconnections and to understand them in
their historical and geographical context. Featured maps aim to be
visual tools to tell stories and explain such interconnections across
space and time. Hosted on our online platform, they include a curated selection of conflicts around a specific thematic issue or regional focus, along with additional relevant data and vector layers
on the map to visualize the situation better. In the following we
want to give an insight into our featured map projects.
The map of Environmental Injustices in Turkey was the first
featured map to be developed. It was still under construction
when the mobilization at Gezi Park happened and was exhibited
on a tree during the demonstrations in June 2013. It was later on
further developed and published online in Turkish. It contributed
to a critical discussion in the Turkish media and civil society about
contested large infrastructure projects in the country.

94

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

The Fracking Frenzy map draws from the report Fracking Frenzy
by Friends of the Earth and presents 30 conflicts and mobilization
by "Fracktivist" movements around hydraulic fracturing activities
across the world. Along with geo-spatial data on the reserves, extraction concessions and companies operating in the country, it
shows any additional data on impacts on the groundwater.
The Climate Debt map shows all fossil fuels and Climate-Justice-related conflicts and highlights the spatial mal-distribution of
climate change sources. It displays CO2 emissions per capita and a
climate change vulnerability index as well as the total carbon debt/
claim of 154 countries in 2011 in million tons of CO2 as calculated
by Rikard Warlenius, Human Ecology, Lund University.
The Mining Conflicts in Latin America map is related to the
mining boom Latin America has experienced in the last four decades. This map displays how the expansion of the metal mining
frontier overlaps with environmental (biodiversity hotspots, forests) and socially sensitive areas (water resources, peasant and indigenous lands) and the related conflicts. Forty percent of these
conflicts have seen violent repression or criminalization of activists. The map integrates data from the Global Witness report
"Deadly Environment", highlighting how environmentalists are
being targeted for their defense of the environment.
The Chevron map shows more than 30 cases of conflict worldwide due to Chevron activities, an emblematic example of corporate violation of human rights against people as well as of corporate impunity. Moreover, according to a study published in
Climatic Change, Chevron is the company which contaminated
the planet most with its carbon dioxide emissions during a period of 150 years (Ekwurzel et al., 2017). The aim of this map is
therefore to show major conflicts concerning extractive activities
led by the Chevron Corporation as well as people's resistance and
struggles against it. This map is the result of a collaborative project
between the EJ Atlas research team at ICTA - UAB, the Unión de
Afectados por Texaco – UDAPT, and A SUD - Ecologia e Cooperazione ONLUS and CDCA - Centro di Documentazione sui Conflitti Ambientali, Italy, and was created as a campaign tool for the
Global Anti-Chevron Day held each year on May 21st. It was used
during the 2016 shareholders' assembly by one of the UADPT lawyers to show the systemic nature of the environmental and human
rights violations perpetrated by the company.
An Italian sub-platform (atlanteitaliano.cdca.it) was developed
with the active involvement of local committees involved in environmental conflicts in the country through the implementation of a participatory tool for citizens. The Italian Atlas was also
presented on the 14 April 2015 at the European Parliament where
meetings were held with Parliamentarians in order to discuss how
to address the issues raised. In addition, meetings with local committees were held in order to network, discuss and improve the
participatory process and the atlas as a political tool.

Conclusion

Through the cooperation with EJOs and their networks in a "hybrid research collective" we hope to further develop and to contribute to the concept of a global EJ movement. As this movement
is already growing, we hope that it will continue to cohere globally,
to formulate more strategic positions and be more inclusive at the
same time as it takes on local nuances. We hope to be able to describe these processes and to analyze new concepts coming from
the grassroots movements and to roughly map the patterns in the
participation of women, of indigenous peoples, of labour unions
and religious groups, and their different ways of intervening in
conflicts of Environmental Injustice. As conflicts intensify, especially along the commodity extraction frontiers and through the
creation of new commodities, we aim to research, exchange and
disseminate more information.
Our hope is that the EJ Atlas can serve as a tool which can benefit from case studies but also go beyond them, for fruitful comparisons across time and space. Beyond research in political ecology,
the map aims to be socially and politically relevant by "naming and
shaming" the actors behind injustices. It is furthermore supposed
to serve as a tool for activists by illustrating critical environmental issues and encouraging public debate over the distribution of
risks, burdens and benefits as well as the claims of local communities and their visions for what Environmental Justice looks like.
References
Bacon, C., de Vuono-Powell, S., Frampton, M.L., LoPresti, T. & Pannu, C. 2013.
Introduction to Empowered Partnerships: Community-Based Participatory Action Research for Environmental Justice. Environmental Justice,
6(1): 1-8.
Casas-Cortés, M.I., Osterweil, M. & Powell, D.E. 2008. Blurring Boundaries:
Recognizing Knowledge-Practices in the Study of Social Movements.
Anthropological Quarterly, 81(1): 17-58.
Castells, M. 1997. The Information Age. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
De Sousa Santos, B. de S. ed. 2007. Cognitive Justice in a Global World: Prudent
Knowledges for a Decent Life. Lanham: Lexington Books.
Ekwurzel, B., Boneham, J., Dalton, M.W., Heede, R., Mera, R.J., Allen, M.R. &
Frumhoff, P.C. 2017. The Rise in Global Atmospheric CO2, Surface
Temperature, and Sea Level from Emissions Traced to Major Carbon
Producers. Climatic Change, 144(4): 579-590.

Escobar, A. 2008. Territories of Difference: Place, Movements, Life, Redes.
Durham: Duke University Press.
Funtowicz, S.O. & Ravetz, J.R. 1994. The Worth of a Songbird: Ecological Economics as a Post-Normal Science. Ecological Economics, 10(3): 197-207.
Global Witness ed. 2016. On Dangerous Ground. globalwitness.org/en/reports/
dangerous-ground, 13 January 2018.
Martinez-Alier, J., Temper, L., Del Bene, D. & Scheidel, A. 2016. Is There a
Global Environmental Justice Movement? The Journal of Peasant Studies,
43(3): 731-755.
Temper, L., Bene, D. del & Martinez-Alier, J. 2015. Mapping the Frontiers and
Front Lines of Global Environmental Justice: the EJAtlas. Journal of Political Ecology, 22(1): 255-278.
Illustrations
Map on previous spread left by EJOLT, ACKnowl-EJ and ENVjustice Projects
– Collaborative Research Projects led at ICTA, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona.
Photograph above left by Leah Temper: An oil spill in Bodo, the Niger
Delta. Shell’s operations in the Delta have seen over fifty years of pollution,
community protests and state violence. The Niger Delta is one of the most
biodiverse and polluted places on the planet.
Photograph above right by Daniela Del Bene: Thousands of people from
across India gathered at Delhi on 2 December 2014 as part of a convergence to protest the unjust and undemocratic decisions of the Modi government on issues of land acquisition, forest rights, health, agriculture, education
and land.
Map on following spread: Poster of the Turkish map of Environmental Justice,
printed to be displayed in Gezi Park.

Mapping Global Environmental Conflicts and Spaces of Resistance

95

97

Collaborative Cartography in Defense of the Commons
GeoComunes
geocomunes.org

98

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

GeoComunes is a collective that carries out research and collaborative mapping for the defense of common goods. We understand
common goods as all elements that are integrated within the process of social reproduction and which by that form the very fabric
of freedom and any possible life in the community.
Our cartographic perspective includes two axes of development. The first one is based on the idea that the Commons' defense requires the investigation and mapping of the territoriality
and capital which seek to appropriate the common goods. We are
interested in visualizing the connections between the expansion
of mega-infrastructure projects and the transformation of Commons into commodified goods. We are also interested in making
visible the territorial logic of capital in Mexico: the connections
between the expansion of transport infrastructure projects (such
as highways, ports and airports) and those of energy infrastructure (gas pipelines, oil pipelines, hydroelectric dams and others),
the mega-mining and industry, all over the territory. The second
axis is based on the conviction that collectively mapping the common goods (forests, water wells, rivers and so on) strengthens
their defense and communal management. In other words: It is
necessary to investigate, systematize and share information about
the territory that we defend.
We believe in the strength of collaborative work. This is why
our methodology includes research, tours, workshops and mapping exercises with urban and rural communities that face some
kind of socio-environmental conflict. In defense of their territory they consider collective mapping as a tool in the battle they
wage. After being invited, we design, together with the organized
community, a cooperation route for the realization of cartographic tools, constructing a collective analysis around the affected regions.
The methodology of GeoComunes is carried out in several stages. The first one is to systematize the information available from
official sources, the local press as well as the materials collected
by the communities in conflict. This is followed by translating the
technical information into cartographic knowledge which makes
it possible to easily visualize the spatial dimensions of mega-infrastructure projects. The maps selected in the first stage are proposals that serve as a basis for initiating the cartographic dialogue
with the communities affected by such projects.
The second stage is developed during workshops and tours,
involving the collective construction of maps and intending to
localize the Commons graphically. This exercise serves as a medium for the discussion, evaluation and projection of the common
territory and the strategies for its defense. During its elaboration
we share the knowledge of the territory that the members of the
community have.

The third stage of GeoComunes' methodology consists of systematizing the knowledge which was built during the workshops
and tours for the digital elaboration of maps, charts, graphs and
infographics after they are complemented and enriched by complementary research. The results are digitized for the carthographers, who then meet in the collective mapping workshops we
described in the second stage. Once the information is validated
by both parties, GeoComunes and the organized community, the
maps are printed and distributed to interested individuals, who
then become part of the wider collaborative mapping community.
The fourth stage of our methodology involves the use and conversion of collective maps into territorial defense tools. The first
users of the collective maps are always members of collective mapping communities. Only after these maps are delivered to communities, the GeoComunes team freely and openly shares the layers and
maps and analyzes them on the virtual platform geocomunes.org.
This website is central to our work because it contributes to the
open access of strategic spatial information and its collaborative
construction. Constructed with open source and free access, this
GeoPortal, as we call our website, allows anybody to view and
download all the elements of our carthography (maps, layers, analyses) and almost all the work that we created for editing and reproduction. These cartographic productions have been used to illustrate news stories, elaborated in direct collaborations with free
and independent media. In some cases, collaborative cartography
has even contributed to legal cases.
The collaborative mapping work began during socio-environmental conflicts in the metropolitan Zone of Mexico City in 2014,
and on the other hand during a national synthesis of various infrastructure projects that helped to contextualize these conflicts. In
two years different stages of collective mapping have been exercised in the Bajío region, in the center of Veracruz, south Chiapas,
in the Northeast of the country, and throughout Central America.
In addition, the participation has taken place in the form of various forums and meetings.
As an example of the work of these years, we now share a series
of maps about a dam and water transfer project in the central west
of Mexico: the Zapotillo Dam, which has been built to flood the
town of Temacapulín and its surrounding environment. We consider that this case illustrates one of the various ways in which the
territories in the country are being modified, unleashing a dispute
for common goods between capital and people.

Collaborative Cartography in Defense of the Commons

99

100

There has been the constant intention to modify largescale metabolisms and water flows in the Lerma-Santiago River basin in Mexico. In the last 70 years a series
of dams have been projected onto its tributaries in order
to use its water in the city of Guadalajara and now in
León. In the region of Los Altos de Jalisco, located between these two cities, water has become a geostrategic
resource that is being hoarded by the big companies of
Bajío. Dams are the means through which such control
is achieved. One of them is the El Zapotillo Dam, which,
together with a large aqueduct, is the project which is intended to bring water to the industrial area around the
city of León. In effect this will cause the flooding of the
communities of Temacapulín, Acasico and Palmarejo.
With this series of maps we want to show that the
intention to modify water flows in this region of the
country, with all the consequences it entails, responds to
the business interests of the export industry in the state
of Guanajuato. These materials were constructed while
meeting with Temacapulín's organized companions and
with the support of other social organizations that accompany the process. The final products were made with
the objective of being used in the assemblies of the towns
of the region and in information campaigns. This adds to
a series of tools that are continuously being generated for
the defense and community construction of the territory. The resulting maps show that this region, in addition
to being threatened by water deprivation, is suffering
from severe pollution generated by industry. Furthermore they show that this project will only increase environmental damage. The Santiago River is an extreme
case and paradigmatic of the implications for health and
environmental crimes that occur in Mexico.
What can you do about it? How can we stop the progress
of dispossession, violence and abuse? In GeoComunes
we think that the communal construction of information and the spatial analyses of the entrepreneurs of
this affront and their project of private appropriation of
common goods is fundamental to building an effective
defense. As a collective, our commitment is for life and
for its free and communal reproduction. In this struggle
maps are one of our tools of organization.

Illustrations
Photograph on previous spread: Mural painting
“Freedom – Temaca won‘t be sold“.
The map on the left was originally published in Spanish and has
been translated for its publication here.

Collaborative Cartography in Defense of the Commons

101

Knitted Flood Wall

Initiating Political Entanglement through a Socially Engaged Participatory Art Project
Martina O’Brien
martinaobrien.com

102

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

The Knitted Flood Wall, 2012, was a socially engaged participatory art project initiated by Irish Visual Artist Martina O'Brien
in collaboration with The Ballsbridge Dodder Residents Association, Dublin. It was founded in the aftermath of the flooding
of the River Dodder, Dublin, Ireland, 24 October 2011. The project witnessed the creation of a 45 feet long x 8 feet wide (13.7 x
2.4m) knitted replica floodwall which visually mapped the river's
velocity flow and took participants six months to complete. This
collaboration explored how art within the public realm can give
a society a voice, how it can be utilized as an accessible language
in which to mediate awareness of an issue, how it can act to gain
political engagement and how it can create disaster risk reduction
by pre-emption and anticipatory action.

A History of Floods

The Dodder is one of the three main rivers in Dublin, Ireland,
and has a history of flooding. The river originates on the northern slopes of the Kippure in the Dublin Mountains, and its course
flows through the city before meeting The Irish Sea. Because of
its steep gradient, the Dodder quickly responds to rainstorms and
is known as a flashy river. In the past it has broken its banks on
many occasions, causing serious damage and occasionally loss
of life. The earliest references of these occurrences trace back to
1620 when it was recorded that "Some houses were swept down
and many cellars and warehouses laid under water". "It [the flood]
made a great havoc, carrying away banks, trees, ditches, hedges
and the mill." Again, in 1754 another flood was recorded that "exceeds anything that can be remembered. Many cattle and people
died and boats drove into the sea. Dublin resembled a place which
had experienced all of the calamities of war. The River Dodder
appeared like a sea." (Blacker, 1860)
One of the most recent severe floods prior to 2011 occurred on 25
August 1986 when Ireland was hit by the costliest tropical cyclone
of the 1986 Atlantic hurricane season – Hurricane Charley. This
historic event destroyed thousands of properties in the city and
caused initial concern for the on-going safety of residents. Unfortunately, as often seen in similar instances, these efforts faded as
quickly as the water retracted.
O'Brien moved into an area along the River Dodder in 2004 and
became familiar with local narratives surrounding past floods. She
also became aware that the elderly population in the area had lived
with a sense of fear and anxiety for 60, 70 and in some cases 80
years, which resulted in them developing an exceptionally bittersweet relationship with the Dodder. Upon living through the 2011
flood herself and witnessing not only her home, contents and belongings destroyed by the deluge but also her neighbours' homes,
she felt that something could be done to bring light to the vulnerability of her community's situation.

Collecting the Threads

In early 2012 O'Brien began working on developing the idea of
knitting a collaborative floodwall. The concept of utilizing knitting as a medium to create this artwork came about from conversa-

tions with residents; the act of situating wool – with its soft nature
– outside in a concrete space seemed a fitting gesture. In addition
to this, the aspect of comfort associated with yarn seemed to add
to its suitability.
From the outset, she had a number of aims and objectives for the
art project; firstly, it had to articulate the need for an immediate installation of a flood defence wall. Secondly, it was to be a genuinely collaborative and participatory project involving residents who
had been directly affected by the flood. Thirdly, it was to enable a
dialogue and a stronger bond within the community. She was also
interested in the importance of a participatory project from a psychological perspective and felt that working together might help to
strengthen the communities' interactions. Finally, it was to involve
the making of a replica velocity map, taken from the Catchment
Flood Risk Assessment and Management (CFRAMS) study of the
River Dodder (see map on the following spread). By doing so, it
allowed the artwork to become a vehicle with which to open up a
conversation with local authorities and governmental bodies.
The Catchment Flood Risk Assessment and Management
(CFRAMS) is the medium to long-term strategy for the reduction and management of flood risk in Ireland and delivers on core
components of the National Flood Policy, adopted in 2004, and
on the requirements of the EU "Floods" Directive. The Office of
Public Works, Dublin, is the lead agency for flood risk management in Ireland and is the national competent authority for the EU
Floods Directive. Dublin City Council worked with the Office of
Public Works to produce provisional studies of the River Dodder;
these included a variety of models and maps. The velocity map was
one of these maps and was chosen because it visually conveyed the
speed of the river and highlighted the most vulnerable areas along
the periphery (see following spread at the bottom right).
O'Brien and the affected community were aware that there were
plans to eventually install a flood defence wall in the area through
the CFRAMS programme. However, this had to run the course of
planning permission being applied for and granted, ring fencing
of budgets and economic pressures, all of which could have delayed the installation of a defence floodwall by years. These possible delays were a real concern to the community since, as we all
know, the concept of a "one in one hundred year flood" is now becoming a very regular occurrence globally.

Knitting a Community

Early 2012, a new residence association was set up in the area by
local householders to help residents deal with local authorities,
insurance companies, politicians, and government bodies. This
was called the Ballsbridge Residence Association. In April 2012,
O'Brien proposed the concept of The Knitted Flood Wall to the
association's committee members and received a mixed response;
some amused laughs, some interested supporters and some resistance by a few concerned members who felt it might be seen as a
vehicle of protest; they worried that, as a group, they may be seen
as trouble makers. Regardless of the feedback received, O'Brien
proceeded with the concept and presented the idea at a communi-

Knitted Flood Wall

103

ty meeting where she asked people to sign up. Some twenty female
participants, ranging in year from twenty to seventy, committed to
the project and work got under way.
Weekly meetings were held over a six-month period so that the
group could knit together, develop the overall pattern and insure
that the artwork followed the pattern base of the velocity map as
closely as possible. Another important aspect of the meetings was
that they created a space for participants to get to know each other better, talk and bond. As people shared their experiences, these
collective gatherings created an intimate space to weave together
a strong bond and gave participants a sense of proactive empowerment.
Once the larger community began to see the Knitted Flood Wall
artwork take shape and grow both in length and momentum, the
project was given support by everyone in the area.

Constructing the Floodwall(s)

On target, the artwork was finished early October in time to mark
the first anniversary of the 2011 floods and to coincide with the
CFRAMS planning permission timeline. The Knitted Flood Wall
was installed along the river on 20 October 2012 for a period of
seven days (see photograph on the top right). The process of installing the artwork along the river itself caused its own set of difficulties and required meetings and planning permission being
applied for and granted from the Dublin City Council. Both the
Ballsbridge Dodder Residents Committee and the artist invited
the Office of Public Work's leading engineer, politicians from
both Fine Gael and the Green Party, along with the Lord Major
of Dublin to officially open the artwork once it was installed. By
virtue of this process, it made all parties fully aware of the community's situation and the need for the immediate installation of
a flood defence wall. In addition to this, the highly visible nature
of the artwork drew attention from wider society and received a
great deal of coverage through all media formats both locally, nationally and internationally. On 24 October 2012, the day of the
anniversary, the Ballsbridge Dodder Residents Committee asked
passers-by to sign a petition in support of the cause and as a result
received thousands of signatures.
In 2013 the Office of Public Works and the Dublin City Council
begun CFRAMS work on a new flood defence wall in the area
around Ballsbridge, Dublin, and in 2015 the works were completed. These works received no objections during the planning stage,
and it was felt that the Knitted Flood Wall project aided the timely
installation of the new flood defence wall on many fronts.
Following on from the Knitted Flood Wall project, O'Brien continued to explore the relationship between communities and the
River Dodder in her 2015 project Casting Territory: A Contemporary River Keepers' Index of Lesser Known Patterns. It was a
collaborative art project with the Dodder Anglers Club, Dublin,
which utilized the art of fly-tying to explore the angler's unique
knowledge of flora and fauna, physical geography and role as
guardians of the River Dodder, Dublin, Ireland.

104

Counter-Cartographies Tie Networks

References
Blacker, Rev. B.H. 2010. Brief Sketches of the Parishes of Booterstown and Donnybrook, in the County of Dublin. Dublin: George Herbert.
Illustrations
Photograph on the top of opposite page and on following spread by Michael
Holly.
Illustration on the bottom of opposite page: RPS Consulting Engineers, Dodder Catchment Flood Risk Assessment and Managment Study, 2010, all rights
reserved © Ordnance Survey Ireland. Licence Number 2010/22/CCMA/
Dublin City Council

Knitted Flood Wall

105

106

107

Counter-Cartographies
Build Political Pressure

Indigenous Cartography in Acre
Influencing Public Policy in Brazil

Comissão Pró-Índio do Acre – Renato Antonio Gavazzi
cpiacre.org.br

110

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

"The map is the mirror of our community, it serves to show
what we learn and helps in understanding the territory."
IAAFs Raimundo Kaxinawá, 20081
The experience reported here refers to the Pro-Indian Commission of Acre (CPI / AC)2, which has been working to produce
"Indigenous Cartography" with Indigenous Agroforestry Agents
(IAAFs) as a means for managing their territories. In mapping
natural resources, morphology, environmental conflicts, cultural
historical elements and many other aspects of the landscape and
life, with the effective participation of indigenous peoples, it is
becoming an important tool for territorial and environmental
management of indigenous lands in Acre.
The production of mental and geo-referenced maps, created
through education, incorporates deep knowledge that indigenous peoples have about their lands and their environment. The
indigenous mapping as a process has contributed to indigenous
people using these maps, which were produced by them, as a tool
for the planning and the management of their lands. This is especially noteworthy since maps have been tools that were historically used against them. This paper attempts to provide answers to
the problem of territorial and environmental management of the
Acre Indigenous Lands and the scene of conflicts experienced by
some indigenous peoples with illegal logging in the border region
between Brazil and Peru.
The ethnomapping workshops, educational activities carried out
in indigenous communities, gather a significant number of indigenous representatives to discuss conflicts, problems and advances related to spatial and environmental management. These
workshops are useful to map and classify the indigenous design,
the different ecosystems that make up their land, areas of agricultural use, management and conservation of natural resources
and agroforestry. They also deal with identifying and naming the
main rivers, streams and lakes, areas of refuge for wildlife, cultural
and spiritual sites, in their original indigenous language as well as
identifying the history of occupation, the conflict areas and other
significant aspects of indigenous peoples.
The ethnomaps3 produced by Indians have become an extremely important tool in the planning of territorial and environmental management activities because the mapping practices
enable reflections, discussions and community mobilization for
more sustainable and organized forms of using the land and natural resources as well as protecting the biodiversity of the territory. Another important aspect of participatory mapping activities
is the systematization and implementation of Land Management
and Environmental Plans (LMEP).

The Indigenous Cartography –
Some Achievements and Advancements in Acre

The Indigenous Cartography in Acre has made significant progress
since mapping the activities contributes and assists indigenous peoples in the production of many valuable materials for indigenous
schools. This, in turn, supports the development of community
projects and informs the surrounding society about the reality of the
territory and the views of the people living in it. It further reflects
and organizes the management and the protection of their territories. Some of the results of this work are that today many indigenous
schools have maps and textbooks and materials of their lands in their
languages. The maps were made by the Indians themselves, so consequently this has contributed to an improvement of teaching and
targeting policy for minority languages in Brazil. The maps of indigenous lands contribute to the history of content, where indigenous
peoples are historical subjects and active in the transformation of
reality while valuing their narratives about the past and present. The
geography contents assist in the discussions and reflections regarding their wealth and difficulties. It also assists in the students' and
teachers' reflections on management processes of their territories.
"Something I found really beautiful, was the fact that we wrote
down the indigenous names for the rivers. We had already
identified some of them, but now we found out that actually all of
them originally had native names. But these names haven’t been
used by the younger generations. When the white men arrived,
they gave their own names to the rivers. These names became
the commonly used ones and only few people still remembered
the native names. But now everybody knows the original names
again and we want them to be used in the schools as well."
Bebito Pianko, 2004
Another significant result of ethnomapping the Kampa Indigenous Land of Ammonia River in 2004 is that the maps produced
by the Indians were important evidence to show the Brazilian government invasions of their land by Peruvian lumberjacks. This
triggered a series of public actions of surveillance and enforcement
along the borders Brazil-Acre and Peru-Ucayali. Another example
of the power of maps and their significance as a political tool were
discussions, negotiations, management and resolutions of conflicts between the Brazilian government and Kaxinawá Rio Humaitá. These maps were produced in the ethnomapping workshops
of Indigenous Kaxinawá Rio Humaitá. They are important pieces
of assistance in discussions and with the issues of negotiating with
indigenous groups who voluntarily live isolated in the southern
part of the indigenous land. The maps were used in awareness
workshops as a tool that helped to develop protective strategies for
isolated Indians and to solve inter-ethnic conflicts in that region.

Indigenous Cartography in Acre

111

The ethnomapping workshops initiated in 2004 contributed positively to the situation of the indigenous peoples of Acre, reflecting
the construction and systematization of management plans for their
land. From 2009 on, a very significant fact in relation to the uncovering of ethnomapping processes was the inclusion of "Territorial
and Environmental Management Plans" in the public policy of the
Acre state for indigenous peoples. Currently the state of Acre has 29
Plans of Territorial and Environmental Management of Indigenous
Lands, and within its policy for indigenous peoples the state government has made human and economic resources available to the Indians. Through their associations, they can now implement part of
their management plans into their communities. The policy focused
on the territorial management of indigenous lands in the state of
Acre. It positively influenced this policy on the national level for the
Territorial and Environmental Management Plans for Indigenous
Lands (PGTAs) and for participatory mapping (ethno-zoning and
ethnomapping). It was set up in 2012 as key tools for the National
Policy of Territorial and Environmental Management of Indigenous
Lands in Brazil. Currently the Ministry of the Environment, along
with the National Indian Foundation – FUNAI4 – are responsible for
promoting, supporting, developing and implementing the Plans of
Territorial and Environmental Management of Indigenous Lands.

112

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

Conclusion

The ethnomaps made by indigenous communities are important
planning tools for the protection, conservation and management
of natural resources. They fill the void of information found on
official maps. They also expose opinions, ideas and aesthetic preferences. Furthermore, they are a powerful tool that can be used
for various political purposes. The maps are also powerful tools
to fight for certain claims. The production of ethnomaps creates
the possibility for indigenous peoples to build their knowledge
and values on the Indian's relationship with "the other", thus
contributing to the formulation of a future strategy by enabling
non-indigenous people to understand the processes of occupation
of geographical space. It also sheds light on social interdependencies within the economic, political and ecological contemporary
world. In this case, the cartographic knowledge of and for indigenous peoples can be an important advocacy tool within the territory and the cultural and intellectual heritage it depicts.

Endnotes
1. All citations extracted from interviews with the participants of ethnomapping-workshops conducted by Renato Gavazzi.
2. The Pro-Indian Commission of Acre and a non-profit organization of
Brazilian civil society, based in Rio Branco, state capital of Acre, were
founded in 1979 during the period of struggle for Brazilian democracy and in times when indigenous peoples were hardly recognized
or not noticed at all. Since then it has worked to support the people
in claiming and exercising their rights. The organization’s mission is to
“support the indigenous peoples of Acre in some of their struggles
for the conquest and the exercise of their collective rights – territorial,
linguistic, social and cultural – through actions that coordinate territorial
and environmental management of indigenous lands, the intercultural
and bilingual education and public policy”. In this regard, the NGO has a
solid relationship with the indigenous peoples of Acre.
3. The National Policy on Environmental and Territorial Management Indigenous Lands – PNGATI – defines etnomapeamento as a “participatory
mapping of the areas of environmental, socio-cultural and productive
relevance for indigenous people, based on indigenous knowledge”.
4. FUNAI is the Brazilian federal government’s protection agency for indigenous interests and culture funai.gov.br.

References
Gavazzi, R.A. 2012a. Agrofloresta e Cartografia Indígena: A Gestão Territorial e Ambiental nas Mãos Dos Agentes Agroflorestais Indígenas do Acre.
São Paulo: Universidade de São Paulo. www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/8/8135/tde-25102012-121716, 13 January 2018.
Gavazzi, R.A. 2012b. Etnomapeamento da Terra Indígena Kampa do Rio Amônia:
o Mundo Visto de Cima. Brasília: Edição e Organização – Programa de
Gestão Territorial e Ambiental – Comissão Pró-Índio do Acre CPI/AC.
Illustrations
Map by Pro-Indian Commission of Acre

Indigenous Cartography in Acre

113

Making Cartographies of Ourselves

1

CRAC Valparaíso – Paulina E. Varas, José Llano Loyola
cracvalparaiso.org

116

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

“Social ecology will have to work towards rebuilding human
relations at every level of the socius.”
Félix Guattari, The Three Ecologies
In April 2014 one of the last great urban-rural fires took place in
the city of Valparaiso, Chile. This fire consumed neighborhoods in
which more than 3,000 people lived. A few days after the fire we
organized, in collaboration with Iconoclasistas, a "Collective Mapping Workshop", which focused on a critical reflection of the ways
to present the city from the standpoint of its representatives and
subjectivities. It also looked at possible ways to collectively build an
integral and binding awareness of the city's most relevant problems.
The mapping workshop originated from an invitation that we extended to the Argentinian duet Iconoclasistas. We organized the
workshop in the Cultural Space of Santa Ana, a popular, self-organized community space located in the Cordillera Hill, one of the 44
hills in the city. This self-organized place is situated next to the first
building designed as workers' housing in Chile in 1870 – the Workers Population La Unión, which was restored by its inhabitants in
early 2000. Attendance to the mapping workshop was wide and
heterogeneous. Participants came from several social, political and
cultural areas; students were also represented. For three days we
worked on four maps of Valparaiso, using diverse graphic supplies.
During this time the main problems of the area slowly became visible; they were associated with the processes of gentrification and
privatization of the city versus the counter-culture and self-management organizations.
The debate at the workshop centered around alternative concepts
of today's city – conceiving places where the city is becoming inclusive and democratic in regards to its public and common spaces. The participants conceptualized the "fictions" that the government elaborates at the discoursive level in order to sell ideas such
as "development" and "innovation" to the citizens. These processes
were contextualized in the face of the advancement of a neoliberal
city that expands without including them and that, by doing so,
creates precarious conditions. We also addressed the progressive
weakening – almost the complete loss – of the ties of the Valparaiso citizens with the ocean due to the diverse projects of commoditization and privatization of access. Due to the fire, the workshop
also provided a place of encounter in a moment of crisis for many;
it was a moment of vulnerability in which people were able to generate action and participation to revitalize links, to make sense of
a series of activities that were taking place throughout the city and
to support those who were affected by the fire.
One of the results of the mapping workshop and its meetings was
a poster titled "Did I invite you to live here?", referring to the cynic
response of the Valparaiso major to a claim from one of the victims of the fire. The phrase also reflects forty years of public housing policy in Chile. One of the critical reflections developed was
that the current city is the result of policies implemented to support private, financing and speculative sectors, the result of land
property and the implementation of subsidies administered by the
Chilean state. These subsidies ultimately serve real estate compa-

nies that make a business out of social housing projects. The poster also highlights a series of other problems: The current port is
almost completely privatized (86%); the life of traditional popular
neighborhoods has suffered from gentrification resulting from
real estate speculation; the eviction of neighbors and the privatization of public spaces, giving primacy to the profile of a city built
for the eventual visitor. In contrast to this outlook, we identified
the presence of cultural, social and communal spaces, the presence
of students and teachers, workers and militants, who, along with
an alerted, solidary community, meet to think about and activate
transformative practices through community self-organization
and networks.
After the workshop, a group in Valparaiso worked on systemizing the information of the four maps. We shared this information
and talked about ways to formulate vital questions in the collective mapping process. Finally, Iconoclasistas worked along with
CRAC in designing the map-poster. The poster was printed in
Valparaiso and distributed formally and informally throughout
the city; it was also plastered on the walls of community and social
centers, public offices and faculty offices. CRAC has been invited to present the mapping process at different universities and
community spaces. A large version of the poster (more than two
meters long) was exhibited in the Museum of Contemporary Art
(Santiago de Chile) in the exhibit on art and activism, "The Workers of the Moon", curated by Loreto Garín and Federico Zukerfeld
between November 2014 and January 2015. At that exhibit, we
also included a display of slogans from the content of the poster
and printed other graphic designs in serigraphy to share it with the
participants during the opening event.

Future Maps or Maps for the Future

The workshop has made us aware of the need to create maps
which enable us to localize problems and visualize some specific
points of reflection on our living conditions in the city. For this
reason we have started a new cartography process. This process
focuses on developing a cartography of water in its environmental, cultural and social dimension. In Valparaiso the water is running out; shrinking water reserves will create problems in a few
years. In the light of this we want to ask, "What kind of life do we
want to sustain?" We have already organized a discussion session
with a geographer and several interested persons. The next step
will be a mapping workshop, using the tools we acquired and the
methods we learned in our first experience in order to design a
poster that collects the information we want to spread throughout
the community. The map will cover the topic of care for life and
the alternative ways in which we can design this life in Valparaiso.
Translation by Carla Guerrón-Montero
Endnotes
1. This text has been written on the basis of a systematic account
developed by Iconoclasistas. It can be found on the following page:
iconoclasistas.net/valparaiso-chile

Making Cartographies of Ourselves

117

119

A Civic Mapping Project in an Indian Megacity
The Uses and Challenges of Spatial Data for Critical Research

Hyderabad Urban Lab – Harsha Devulapalli, Indivar Jonnalagadda
hydlab.in

120

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

Hyderabad Urban Lab (HUL) looks at cities as a complex set of relationships consisting of relations of production, social relations
and relations between citizens and governments. HUL began in
mid-2012 with the aim of conducting research on urban issues in
a way that would bridge the gap between academic urban research
and life at the grassroots. Since the beginning, HUL has experimented with cartography and connected this to both research and
pedagogy. HUL makes maps but also advocates to both the government and citizens for a richer cartographic engagement within
the city. Over the years HUL has held mapping workshops with a
variety of stakeholders and even schoolchildren.
Occurrences in cities are the result of numerous relationships
coming together at multiple scales of space and time. As Dennis Wood (2010) says, one can portray these intersections by
bringing things together on a common level. It is this level and
the propositions that make the map. As Peter Turchi (2004) puts
it, maps are no different from literature in the sense that they
attempt to explain human realities. It is the cartographer's privilege to select what is included and what isn't. Thus maps in general are assertions of the state of the world which cartographers
desire. This is why maps are tools of power. The state, which in
many countries holds exclusive rights over mapping, can choose
to portray certain versions of reality while omitting others. Corporations with large amounts of spatial data also hold great power over the way the world is increasingly being perceived and

experienced through digital maps. In this context, practices of
critical mapping stand outside the norm of using maps to declare
sovereign power or to facilitate consumption. They, in fact, talk
back to this power and help citizens or communities to represent
their own geographies.
Since its inception, HUL has used critical mapping as a core methodology in research, a key tool in engaging with various urban
stakeholders and also as an essential component of its pedagogic
outreach. Having undertaken a wide variety of mapping projects
and teaching workshops, our practice itself has deepened rigorously. Here we present, with examples from our work, four of our
key mapping practices, the principles that direct them, the practical difficulties we face and the reasons why we are committed to
working with open data and crowd-sourcing.

Community Mapping
Maps of Bholakpur's Scrap Markets

HUL's earliest project was to build a digital tool in order to enable
collaborative research with the community in a historic neighbourhood called Bholakpur – a former hub of leather tanneries
and today a hub of scrap markets. The motivation was to understand the political economy of the markets and also to revalorize
the neighbourhood in terms of its dynamics and economic productivity, something the government has been neglecting.

A Civic Mapping Project in an Indian Megacity

121

Members of the community responded eagerly and played a major role in facilitating the process. They helped us to collect GPS
tracks and to identify the key objects represented on the map.
The community members quickly understood the usefulness of
the map and also that they had taken ownership of it. The idea
that community mapping might be an empowering process was
affirmed by maps drawn to contest the government's view of
Bholakpur.
Taking ownership of these maps also enables the community to
make claims on their own knowledge of the place. Bholakpur's
scrap markets have been facing pressure from the government
and are threatened with eviction. This pressure is a result of popular perceptions regarding persistent water contamination in the
area and its connection to the presence of the scrap market. With
the help of maps, local field workers are able to identify specific
locations in the neighbourhood in which contamination is persistent. This data can then be collated with the locations of scrap
processing units and their runoff. The spatial data was able to
demonstrate that there was little or no correlation between water contamination and the presence of scrap markets. An ability to
work with maps and spatial data has given residents of the neighbourhood leverage in negotiating with governments and NGOs
that work in the area.

Crowd-Sourcing Data – Bus Frequency Map

The Andhra Pradesh Road Transport Corporation (APSRTC)
runs most of the city buses in Hyderabad but does not have a public database of all bus routes and time schedules in the city. After extensive cleaning of a rather faulty list of bus stops and bus
routes acquired from the APSRTC, the result was the first geospatial database of bus routes in Hyderabad.
The map generated from this database is useful for citizens but it
also helps us to understand areas in the city that are deprived of
public transportation. With this base map, we asked: How do people travel in areas with no public transportation available? We presumed that the answer was represented in shared auto rickshaws.
As an experiment, we put out a public call for people to contribute
shared auto rickshaw routes that they knew of. Within 8 hours,
we had details on 85 routes in the city. Adding all of these routes to
the existing frequency network map further enhanced the public
database on mobility in Hyderabad.

Public Audits Using Maps – Map of Public Toilets

Public audits and fact-finding missions have long been a useful
methodology employed by activist groups and other civil society
organisations in India for holding the government accountable for
the rights of citizens. We believe that the addition of maps as a tool
will be invaluable to this methodology.
The current government of India announced that sanitation
would be one of its priorities. While the government was targeting
the people's attitude towards defecation in public, we published
our map in order to put these attitudes in the context of the avail-

122

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

able infrastructure. Hyderabad, a city of more than 6 million people, has only 186 public toilets. Our map highlights the unjust and
sparse distribution of toilets in the city. Another focus of our dynamic map is to show the inequality between available toilet facilities for men and women. The data was collected through a public
audit conducted by the HUL team and some volunteers.
Our map also illustrates the perverse outcome of an incentive for
free advertising on the outer walls of toilets provided to private
contractors if they built new public toilets. As a result, 50 new
toilets were constructed. However, many of them were located in
squares which were already served by a public toilet; sometimes
they were built just adjacent to old ones while leaving many areas of the city still unserved. Perplexed by this choice of location,
we supplemented our mapping exercise with an audit of some of
these toilets. We found that the incentive structure meant that
private contractors built toilets where their visibility as billboards
would be greatest. Although the incentive had been offered with
good intentions, poor monitoring of the outcomes resulted in inadequate, sometimes redundant results with respect to the goal of
expanding access to public toilets. Many of our mapping exercises are conducted in this audit modality with which we hope to be
able to persuade the government to plan public amenities and implement policies with greater care.

Cleaning up Public Data
Atlas of Slums in Hyderabad

Most cities in the developing world such as Hyderabad tend to
have data in closed and archaic formats which impede interoperability. They also lack inventories to keep stock of multiple data
sets across space and time (e.g. it is hard to find any data on pre1990 municipal wards for Hyderabad). The periodic realignment
of administrative boundaries and enumeration blocks makes it
especially hard to build cohesive data sets over time. Uncertainty about data rights is another major problem. These issues often represent obstacles for anyone interested in doing research
in these cities.
In a bid to transform Hyderabad into a "slum-free city" (real worldclass city), the city government was going to conduct a count of all
the slums in its jurisdiction, which amounted to 1476. As is common, this task was outsourced to a private company. Unbelievably,
the task was conducted within 30 days and with a budget of just
1.8 million rupees (roughly 23,000 Euros). We highly question the
validity of this information and the legitimacy of how the data was
collected. In any case, some data was produced. Although there are
some glaring inconsistencies, the map gives us the only available
representation of slums in Hyderabad, and, more importantly, this is a representation of how the government itself sees the
"slumscapes" of the city.
An atlas of maps depicting various characteristics of recognised
slums in Hyderabad was put together through a painstaking process of cleaning this inconsistent data. By sharing these maps
with the government, we wish to inform it about the possibilities
for analysis and planning offered by clean spatial data. Through

regular articles and interventions at consultation meetings, we
are trying to push the government towards improving their data
practices. This is a long-term project because we believe that apart
from civic mapping projects, public data itself should be publically
accessible in general.

References
Turchi, P. 2004. Maps of the Imagination: The Writer as Cartographer. San Antonio, Texas: Trinity University Press.
Wood, D. 2010. Rethinking the Power of Maps. New York: The Guilford Press.

Conclusion

Being in the open domain, our maps have constantly elicited new
questions and new proposals from the citizens looking at them.
It is evident that the general ethos to support the fruitful use of
open data as well as the employment of crowd-sourcing practices
is already happening in our city. With each new project, we try to
tap into that ethos. With each workshop, we try to further encourage it. With each engagement, we try to extend the conviction that
planning cities can be a more democratic exercise.

A Civic Mapping Project in an Indian Megacity

123

Mapping Sexual Harassment in Egypt
HarassMap team – edited by Noora Flinkman
harassmap.org/en

126

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

Women everywhere experience sexual violence in public – from
ogling, comments and catcalls, online harassment, touching and
stalking, to sexual assault and rape. Sexual harassment in particular is an everyday struggle that Egyptian women have to endure,
and in many cases accept, while going about their daily life. It is
often seen as a trivial matter with few or no consequences and
as the women's own fault. Not acknowledging the responsibility
of perpetrators as well as its impact on women's perceptions of
themselves and their role in society.
Sexual harassment is misunderstood and underreported all
over the world. Stigma and shame prevent many women from
talking about it or reporting it, and data on the problem is scarce.
New web and mobile technologies have, however, opened up possibilities to overcome some of the barriers to documentation and
data collection on the issue. HarassMap's reporting and mapping
platform, which has become a key tool for generating data and
providing the public with an alternative way to report sexual harassment, has had great success in bringing about debates and discussions about the issue in Egypt and worldwide.

The Map

HarassMap's map utilizes web and mobile technologies to crowdsource incidents of sexual harassment from all over the country.
Individuals who either experience or witness sexual harassment
are able to anonymously submit reports directly through the web
interface or through Facebook and Twitter, provided that the report includes some basic mapping criteria – including location and
date/time of the incident – the reports are automatically mapped
using Google Maps and made publically available on the HarassMap website. Each report appears on the map as a red dot that,
when clicked, displays the full information of the report in its
original language (Arabic or English). Each report includes not
only the location and the date/time but also a text description of
the incident, the type(s) of sexual harassment (for example comments, stalking or following). Sometimes it also contains additional information on the age or educational level of the reporter
and harassed person and whether or not witnesses who intervened
are included. Each report receives a response with information on
how to access free legal services and psychological counseling.
The data on the map is open for anyone to view and use and
serves multiple functions. This includes providing testimony by
those who experience or witness sexual harassment as to the seriousness of the problem, serving as data for understanding how
sexual harassment is evolving in Egypt, providing HarassMap
with information that can be used to tailor communication campaigns and educational programs and serving as a tool to motivate
the public to report and stand up against sexual harassment. Immediately after launching the map in 2010, HarassMap received a
large number of reports of sexual harassment, and over the years
the crowdsourced data has helped to reformulate the discussion
on sexual harassment in Egypt. It has also helped to challenge stereotypes and misinformation about the issue.

Sexual Harassment: How Effective Is Crowdsourced Data?
Crowdsourcing has emerged as an exciting new method for data
collection yet its efficacy remains poorly understood. In 2014,
HarassMap published a study1 that investigated the strengths and
weaknesses of crowdsourcing tools, such as its own reporting and
mapping platform as a data collection method, comparing it to traditional data collection techniques, such as questionnaires, focus
groups and interviews. The study suggests that online reporting
and mapping can be an effective alternative for data collection on
sensitive issues such as sexual harassment.
The findings show that accounts of sexual harassment reported
on a map often provide a much more striking picture of the problem than those derived from in-depth interviews, for example. Map
reports are bolder, with individuals providing more information
about their experience of sexual harassment than they did during
interviews. With regard to language, sexualized words and phrases
that might cause discomfort in a face-to-face interview setting with
an unknown interviewer are much more prominent in the map data.
Reports received via the map are also fuller and more comprehensive than in the interviews, which may suggest that people are
more willing to speak about the issue anonymously online than in
person. The map narratives exhibit a recurring four-part structure
characterized by 1. a set-up of the scene, 2. details of the sexual harassment itself, 3. the response of the harassed individual, and 4. the
moral (offering public comments on sexual harassment in Egypt in
general). This structure was not seen in the in-depth interviews, in
which shorter question and answer exchanges were more common
than extended narratives. What's more, while "milder" types of sexual harassment, such as catcalls and ogling, were the most common
forms of harassment discussed during in-depth interviews, touching, physical assault and rape were the most commonly reported
types in map reports. This may represent a major advantage of the
map over traditional methods, as it offers a space in which individuals can speak relatively freely and without judgment – making
people more willing to discuss sensitive issues and painful experiences, such as sexual harassment or assault. HarassMap is based on
the idea that if more people start taking action when sexual harassment happens in their presence, we can end this epidemic.
Endnotes
1. HarassMap (2014). Towards a Safer City – Sexual Harassment in Greater Cairo: Effectiveness of Crowdsourced Data.
harassmap.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Towards-A-Safer-City_
full-report_EN-.pdf, 6 May 2017.
References
Fahmy, A., Abdekmonem, A., Hamdy, E. & Badr, A. 2014. Towards a Safer City Sexual Harassment in Greater Cairo: Effectiveness of Crowdsourced Data.
harassmap.org/storage/app/media/uploaded-files/Towards-A-Safer-City_
executive-summary_EN.pdf, 5 June 2017.
Illustrations
authors map
idea: Rebecca Chiao, co-founders and volunteers
design & illustration: Piero Zagami and Noora Flinkman
content: anonymous reporters

Mapping Sexual Harassment in Egypt

127

128

129

Untangling the Strategies of Capital
Towards a Critical Atlas of Ecuador
Colectivo de Geografía Crítica del Ecuador
geografiacriticaecuador.org

130

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

Ecuador's Critical Geography Collective emerged in 2012 as a result of a happy encounter among geographers, social scientists and
activists concerned with answering theoretical and practical questions about growing territorial tensions around the country. Even
though Ecuador has had one of the most advanced constitutions
in the world since 2008 pertaining to the rights of indigenous
peoples and communities1, the government's promise to put these
rights into practice in this post-neoliberal period has not come to
fruition. Actualy quite the opposite has been the case. The abuse
of collective rights and invasions of indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian
and peasant territories have dramatically increased. In contrast to
the previous neoliberal period, the state has become the protagonist in this process while legitimizing a discourse that justifies the
arbitrary and violent expansion of its territorial mesh in the name
of a supposed national interest and in association with capitalist
interests.
In constant dialogue with authors who represent Latin American critical geography, our analyses and practices break with the
hegemonic perspective which proposes the state as the only agent
of territorial regulation: In contrast to this hegemonic perspective,
we recognize other social actors as legitimate agents of regulation
concerning their own lives as well as reproductive spaces. We
denounce the arbitrary violation of rights carried out during the
current political period. In fact, our actions are based on the perception that the so-called legitimization of territorial regulation
is actually always accompanied by its opposite: the deregulation
of organized territories based on different logics and different
feelings, in connection with nature as well as human beings. In
this matter, geography is understood only as "technical" and – supposedly neutral – knowledge. However, in practice it is tightly
bound to a territorial "regulation" that defends the rights of capital
interests. The Critical Geography Collective has hereby become
a space of formation, research and denouncement, profoundly
compromised with resisting the capitalist model of the plundering
and degradation of nature and indigenous peoples.
Our work is characterized by its collective and dialogic nature,
which we try to achieve through permanent discussion and complementarity between our capacities and interests. These are of
theoretical, cartographic and communicative nature. They also
include other related research. We initiated a series of activities
throughout the last four years by associating the use of cartographic tools with theoretical and political reflections in a critical
matter. The activities included the following: collective readings
and reflection of classic and contemporary writings in critical geography; training on tools for community mapping; research on
the background and impact of public policies and laws connected
to state territorial regulation; public denunciation of projects connected with capital interests through manifestos and press conferences in order to demystify and problematize the official discourse; organized conversations with national and international
guests in order to disseminate other experiences of resistance as
well as our own research projects; cartographic simulations of the
effects extractivist projects have on invaded territories; finally we
tried to generate support, cartographic production and political
analyses of the criminalization of protests in Ecuador.
The accumulation of the experiences mentioned as well as the
individual research projects and activist work of each member

of the collective have greatly contributed to shaping our former
project of building a national critical atlas2. Through surveys, systematization, analysis and cartographic representation of different variables at the local and national level we aim to understand
the complex dynamics of territorial tensions around the common
goods in Ecuador. This includes the actions of businesses and the
state itself, as well as the discourses developed by the state to legitimize the invasion of the indigenous peoples' territories. We also
try to focus on the relation of communities with their territories.
The idea is to analyze a base of 25 territorial conflict cases and

thereby create a systemic and critical reading of the tendencies
and strategies of capital in their concrete materialization3. This
information can then also be articulated within a broader geopolitical context. This allows for reflection about the mode in which
capital interests are territorialized in the country. It also generates
inputs for resisting communities. Likewise, the construction of
the Atlas aims to visualize the latent conflicts generated by the
expansion of the territorial mesh of the state. Hereby it shows
and explicitly denounces aspects which are generally hidden or
mystified by the governmental discourse of local development
and national interests.
In addition to a few composite maps and explanations about
the general context, we have worked specifically on each of the
aforementioned cases. The case of oil exploitation in the Yasuní
National Park, located in the Ecuadorian Amazon, is perhaps the
most emblematic of all. It surely is the most dramatic in terms of
the abuse of constitutionally recognized territorial rights in the
name of the myth of national development and, in this case, the
myth of the Amazonian demographic void4. The map "Record of
Incidents with Indigenous Peoples in Isolation in Waorani Territory and the Yasuní National Park" explains the territorial conflicts
alive in the zone: One can see the complex superposition of the
Intangible Zone Tagaeri-Taromenane (ZITT, indigenous peoples
in voluntary isolation), the Waorani territory (recently contacted
peoples), the state's political-administrative division and the protected area of the Yasuní National Park. In fact, more than latent,
it is a case of manifested conflicts, in which the killings among
indigenous peoples shows the cruelest side of the consequences
of territorial pressure and environmental and social unbalances.

Untangling Capital’s Strategies

131

These unbalances are generated by the expansion of extractivist
activities and the resulting infrastructure in and colonization of
these territories.
As part of the "Cartography to Not Forget", we presented the
map of detentions and militarization of the country apropos the
National Strike in August 2015. This map shows the repressive
strategies of the Ecuadorian state in response to resistance5. Organized by the indigenous movement and rural and urban workers, the strike has been heavily repressed by the Ecuadorian state,
through the use of forceful invasion, detentions, aggressions and
other violations of human rights. Even though – according to our
analysis – direct violence is not the main repressive strategy of the
state6, the criminalization of protests has grown brutally in the
country throughout the last years.

While we respond to specific demands that emerge in the making, we are currently in a phase of reflection about the primary
and secondary data generated during the creation of the Atlas.
Based on the questions and observations that developed during
the first stage, we are currently analyzing some specific themes
and challenges: the transversal insertion of the feminist outlook
in this analysis, how to guarantee that the material we produce
strengthens the communitys social fabric and struggles, and how
to characterize the post-neoliberal state in a more precise manner.
More than a goal itself, the Atlas has become a means to rethink
and strengthen our actions as a collective. It has also become key
in building up our capacity to develop a dialogue with and support
of resistance struggles.
Translation by Carla Guerrón-Montero

132

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

Endnotes
1. The Montecristi Constitution recognizes the state as plurinational and
intercultural, in addition to presenting an extensive list of collective
rights and to considering nature as a subject with rights.
2. The article “Critical territorial knots in Ecuador: dynamics, changes and
limits in the territorial reconfiguration of the state” (Bonilla et al., 2016)
was the first effort to systematize the Collective’s research. It presents an
analysis of the challenges and limits of executing territorial rights in Ecuador. Another article that systematizes part of the research conducted by
the Collective is titled “Geographies of sacrifice and geographies of hope:
territorial tensions in plurinational Ecuador” (Silveira et al., 2017).
3. The case selection was based on a the following variables: national
relevance, representation, degree of threat to a community, degree
of invisibility and relevance, and the linkages and relationships we had
developed with some communities and local resistance processes.
4. We analyze one specific case more in depth in the Manifesto against the
Exploitation of the Yasuní National Park, published in
geografiacriticaecuador.org/2014/04/11/colectivo-en-defensa-del-yasuni/
5. The map is part of the “Preliminary Report about the State’s Strategies
of Social Control and Repression in the Context of the National Strike in
Ecuador”, prepared by the Psychosocial Research and Action Collective.
6. In the preliminary analysis for the Atlas, we defined three types of repressive action that the state has taken in order to facilitate investments
and the territorialization of companies: administrative actions, covert
actions and direct violence. The majority of cases are connected with
administrative actions.

References
Bonilla, O., Maldonado, P., Silveira, M. & Bayón, M. 2016. Nudos Territoriales
Críticos en Ecuador: Dinámicas, Cambios y Límites en la Reconfiguración Territorial del Estado. GeoGraphos. Revista Digital para Estudiantes
de Geografía y Ciencias Sociales, 7: 66-103
hdl.handle.net/10045/53465, 22 March 2018.
Silveira, M.M., Moreano, M., Romero, N., Murillo, D., Ruales, G. & Torres, N.
2017. Geographies of Sacrifice and Geographies of Hope: Territorial
Tensions in the Plurinational Ecuador. Journal of Latin American Geography, 16(1): 69-92.
Illustrations
Photograph previous spread left: Mapping of the ancient territory superimposed by the national park Llanganates, November 2012
Photograph previous spread right: GPS Workshop in the moorlands of
Salcedo, April 2013

Untangling Capital’s Strategies

133

A Students’ Map for a Students’ Building
Working from within and beyond the Map

Geoide en Revolución
geoide-enrevolucion.blogspot.com

136

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

We are Geoide en Revolución, a political group composed of students and alumni of the Faculty of Geography at the University of
Buenos Aires. At some point in our activism, a few years ago, we
began to understand and use social cartography (similar to participatory mapping) as a valuable tool for working with and for social organizations. Social cartography as a method is not offered
within our college training, so we had to educate ourselves on our
own. We started out through internal reading groups, participated
in summits on the topic and soon put the tool to use. We have held
workshops in secondary schools for adults, where some of our
members teach, and in the villa (slum) n° 21/24, where we have
been involved in the "Mesa Por la Urbanización Participativa de
Villa 21/24" (the task group for participatory slum development).
While following this path, we decided to act on a territory which
is key for Geoide: our school within the university, the Facultad
de Filosofía y Letras (School of Philosophy and Literature). In
November 2011 we organized a workshop aimed at mapping our
school from the students' points of view, based on our knowledges
as subjects who participate in creating this space every day. Our
proposal and our challenge was to think about the school environment not only as a physical space but also as a socially constructed
space which is disputed by different actors: students, authorities,
teachers and other staff, each of whom possesses their own interests and political stances.
At the time the workshop was organized, there was a conflict – which still has not been solved – among school authorities,
students and other actors concerning the construction of a new
building. Many blueprints for this construction were presented
by different architectural firms, but none of the buildings reflected student interests. Considering the current shortage and overcrowding of classrooms, the student body requests a building with
large classrooms for undergraduate courses. We have also asked
for a cafeteria with affordable meal prices as well as a nursery for
the children of students and staff, both of which would facilitate
the access of lower-income students to higher education. Neither
of these have been included in the blueprints. The final blueprints for the new building include only classrooms, most of them
small, which might be set aside for paid graduate programs or private language lessons (whereas undergraduate courses are free).
On the other hand, the funds for construction will come from a
company that is associated with transportation infrastructure
mega-projects throughout all of Latin America – a fact which has
caused alarm among students.

Our project started with a workshop in which we explained the
potential of social cartography and then divided the participants
into small groups for debating, exchanging ideas and drawing
maps on blank posters. Some of the key questions we suggested
were: What different spaces can we find in our school? What kind
of actors, processes and problems do we associate with each one?
What spaces do we feel closest to? Which spaces do we perceive as
strange and unknown?
In this workshop, more than 50 students showed up from different majors (geography, history, anthropology, education and
art history). Together we decided to merge the ideas that came
up in the small groups into a single map, with the aim of showcasing both our work and the issues we wanted to make known
and intervene with. We also particularly intended to systematize
the discussion taking place during the activity. The workshop
consisted of making maps but it went beyond that: How could
we give an account of the concerns that came up during the process, exceeding the possibilities of expression on the map? Systematization, as an exercise of putting the collective production
of knowledge into words, became a key tool in the project. After
many meetings, in which we read and analyzed the maps, we put
together a single map – presented here – that is intended to summarize our discussions.

A Students’ Map for a Students’ Building

137

The map displays the building's five floors as concentric circles.
The lower floors (represented by the larger outer circles) happen
to include the busiest and most democratic spaces, such as the
courtyard, the student-run cafeteria and classrooms for entry-level courses. The upper floors are increasingly "elitist": The second
and third floors contain more advanced courses and administrative offices, whereas research departments and other offices are
located on the fourth and fifth floors (which are unknown to most
students). The shrinking circles provide a visual analogy for the
fact that many students start to study at university, fewer of them
manage to continue and graduate, and even fewer can access research positions.
This map condenses the ideas, visions and representations
which appeared in most of the initial maps, among which there
were differences but also surprising similarities. Through different icons, it displays concerns and claims which are central to the
student movement at our school and in our country. Examples include the disconnection between spaces of learning (classrooms)
and spaces of research (in the case of our school the fourth floor,
which is represented by question marks on the map); the commodification of knowledge; the need to democratize university
decision-making processes; and the rejection of the school authorities' control of public spaces (security cameras, fences, private security guards, regulations on courtyard usage, limitations
on poster-hanging and political activity in the hallways).
Additionally, the map expresses infrastructure problems
which have worsened over time: insufficient classroom sizes, malfunctioning bathrooms, locked emergency exits, flooding that destroyed part of the library and power outages. Besides these issues,
the map shows spaces which are connected to student activism.
These places convey great symbolic meaning. Their very names
honor the memory of young activists murdered during protests,
such as Darío Kosteki, Maximiliano Santillán and Mariano Ferreyra. Finally, the map mentions the historic moment in 2010
when students took over the school in protest: for 31 days normal
activities were interrupted and public lectures as well as mass
meetings were held.

138

Counter-Cartographies Build Political Pressure

This "map made by students" has been useful in several ways:
When it was made, it condensed – in a single collective production
– all student claims with regards to the new building, thus contributing to the student movement. The conflict concerning the
building has continued through institutional channels, in a commission initially composed of teachers, students and staff representatives, facing many bureaucratic obstacles. For that reason the
student body has ceased to participate and school authorities have
gone ahead with their original blueprints (which have been described above) for a new building located next to the old one. The
confirmation of construction has been considered a partial victory
– since an imperfect new building is better than no new building
at all – but as of 2016 it has not yet begun.
Our social cartography workshop has achieved its goal of making this tool more widely known and of solidifying our specificity
as geographers and activists for a critical geography. At the same
time we have positioned ourselves as part of a much larger collective: the student body of our school. We also had the chance to
share this instrument with schoolmates who had not been aware
of it and who now use it in their activist work as a tool for visualizing, constructing and transforming their territories.

Workshop of Social Cartography
in the Faculty of
Philosophy and Language
While searching for social
transformation, which is based on
the collective construction of new
knowledge, social cartography
is a tool that allows to show the
different conflicts hiding behind a
variety of hegemonic practices.
Although they omit various
inequalities and social conflicts,
maps are often used as unquestionable representations of the
real world. At the same time the
world is constructed from multiple
perceived realities and thus collectively and heterogeneously built.
Deconstructing the idea of the
map as something widely accepted
means to appropriate the tool in
order to dispute the relations of
power.
Let's get together and build a map of
our faculty in order to learn more
about the conflicts around us and to
facilitate change collectively!

A Students’ Map for a Students’ Building

139

141

Counter-Cartography
Is Education

Counter-Mapping for Resistance and Solidarity in the Philippines

Between Art, Pedagogy and Community

Arnisson Andre C. Ortega, Ma. Simeona M. Martinez, Cian Dayrit, Kristian Karlo C.Saguin

144

Counter-Cartography Is Education

Mapping is a deeply political practice. Especially when considering
how it is embedded in the reproduction of power in the Philippine
context. Historically, mapping can be linked to colonial exploits
and imperial pursuits as it attempts to represent colonized populations and places within a legible territory conducive for exploitation and control (see Harris & Hazen, 2006). In the Philippines
maps serve as nation-building tools as they project a spatial vision
of a nation that can easily be managed, planned and subjected to
militarization. Maps have been largely used as tools for accumulation and control by the state, the industries, the church and other
powerful institutions while the interests and needs of subaltern
populations were ignored. Opposing these mapping practices, we
argue that mapping can be reclaimed and used for social justice.
In this contribution we feature collaborative counter-mapping
efforts by critical Filipino geographers, artists and communities
in the Philippines. With progressive goals, these counter-mapping projects grapple with how to articulate space not just to appropriately represent the everyday geographies inhabited by marginalized populations. They also provide mechanisms to criticize
neoliberal projects, to build stronger alliances among groups and
to expose the malevolent geographies of accumulation and dispossession which are behind the contemporary developments in
the Philippines. Further, these projects reflect the multiplicity of
counter-cartographic initiatives that often entail engagements
across various sectors, from university students to people's organizations.

The Context: Development, Nation
and the Need for Counter-Mapping

Development is a highly contested term that is associated with
multiple meanings and the visions of various groups. For the state,
development is a necessary outcome it has to provide for its population. Its articulation through actual programs usually entails the
identification of spaces that policy interventions and development
visions are projected onto. In development, maps and mapmaking
serve as an important role in making state spaces legible. In recent
decades the Philippines have been subject to investment-oriented
policies and programs, which in turn have encouraged the conversion of the use of land and the creation of special economic zones
(SEZs) to attract foreign capital (see Ortega, 2016; Kelly, 2000).
Across the country, vast tracts of land have been identified and
planned as sites of SEZs (see Ortega, Acielo & Hermida, 2015).
These projects are contained in master plans that carry the state's
vision for these spaces and are rendered powerful as they tend to
override other visions and claims made by residents. Those who
live in these spaces do not necessarily have the same spatial vision
as the ones projected by the state in master plans.
Counter-mapping brings together these multiple visions of
space. As an antidote to the fixed and final partitioning of space by
the state, counter-mapping sees maps as processes and encounters
that recognize multiple spatialities operating simultaneously. By
counter-mapping national spaces of development, we therefore
expose the contested visions of development. We consider participatory methods and art as creative and effective means for
counter-mapping that challenge the state's spatial vision.

Counter-Mapping, Art and Pedagogy

Many counter-mapping projects have been associated with creating community maps to be used for indigenous claims. There are,
however, multiple forms of counter-maps and counter-mapping
practices that contest state power. In this chapter we focus on how
art and pedagogy can be potent ways of engaging and collaborating with communities by using maps.
Art provides a creative medium for communicating aspirations,
dreams and the plight of marginalized populations. Through collaborative and community-oriented art projects, spatial narratives
of the oppressed may resist and outlast hegemonic stories about
specific landscapes and built environments. These projects may
rupture rigid cartographic narratives of city projects and regional
master plans by exposing contested histories, relations and bodily
experiences that have been silenced for the sake of particular notions of progress and development.
Counter-mapping can be an effective pedagogical tool for both
students and communities. Through the processes from formulating problems and collecting data to creating and disseminating
maps, counter-mapping exposes critical issues faced by marginalized communities as well as the ways in which cartographic concepts and tools can be applied when addressing these concerns.
Furthermore, counter-mapping also activates the political possibilities of solidarity by connecting the struggles of marginalized
communities with pedagogical objectives.
Counter-Mapping through Art
The Filipino artist Cian Dayrit uses cartography and mapping to
tackle power, control and memory. His compelling body of work
incorporates imagery, context and cartography in an effort to creatively visualize information, particularly that involving social and
political movements. In his work mapping is considered a tool for
resisting hegemony, for projecting the aspirations of marginalized
classes and for exposing issues of dispossession among the landless.
Given that maps serve as an emblem of imperial imagination,
Cian uses cartographic images to expose neo-colonial visual unconsciousness and subvert Western cartographic practices. For example, his Atlas of the Global South exhibition investigated geo-political tensions, neo-liberal policy and neo-colonialism that have
shaped Global south affairs. The maps in the project challenge the
traditional format of historical maps in order to plot and represent
issues of inequality, hegemony and violence. In Cartography for
Colonialism, Cian proposes alternative readings of colonially-defined borders. It attempts to defeat the function of maps as tools to
uphold the traditional structures of political power while creating
counter-narratives of the reconstruction of colonial property history. Questioning the validity of Western cartographic practices and
its authorship, this project interrogates the notions of nationhood
and imperialism and takes on the angle of history from "below". This
is done by using pre-colonial place names, plotting places of power
and resistance, and tracing social and revolutionary movements as
well as trade routes, demarcation lines and piracy (see map at the
end of the article, left). Another exhibition titled Seascapes: Tranquility and Agitation features map pieces that question notions of
nation building and sovereignty as well as territory and struggle (see
map at the end of the article, right). A map of Negros Island, which is
known as the sugar bowl of the Philippines, presents multiple views

Counter-Mapping for Resistance and Solidarity in the Philippines

145

on the history of the island and the sugar industry. On the one hand,
it shows the family tree of Jorge Vargas (executive secretary to President Manuel L. Quezon in Commonwealth Philippines, donor of
Vargas Museum, among many other things). It shows a marker for
his birth place as well as the names of the prominent families who
migrated to the island in the 1880s to invest in sugar production. On
the other hand, the map focuses on feudalism and struggle in the
sugar industry. In the main cartouche, the pre-colonial place name
for the island was used to symbolize the resistance against colonial
oppression and the feudal state.
Cian's art also involves collaborations with collectives, unions,
academics and other individuals. This practice is largely borne out
of the need to articulate issues concerning social justice and inequality, particularly with peasant and indigenous communities.
These collaborations underscore the need to explore alternative
modes of resistance to the neo-colonial, semi-feudal state system
which rampantly exploits the marginalized sectors of Philippine
society. He has forged alliances with various groups in conducting community-based indigenous mapping and counter-cartographies, melding ethnography, mapping and art. An example of
these collaborations is a series of workshops with indigenous
peoples and farmers held in protest spaces and encampments in
Metro Manila. These workshops involved asking participants to
draw maps of their everyday lives in their home communities.
The aim was to develop a counter-mapping module that can be
used in community organizing and in making maps for showing spaces of displacement and dispossession. Through memory
work, participants made mental maps (see illustration below) that
identified the sites where they lived, worked, worshipped and organized. The maps also situated places of fear and confrontations,
especially sites in which harassments by (para)military forces occurred. Participants used various ways of representing their tumultuous community geographies, such as labels, icons, lines as
well as elaborate narratives explaining certain sites and relationships. Identified spaces included sites of horrific events, such as
massacres, areal bombings by the military, ambush sites, polluted
rivers caused by refineries, old trails that had been fenced off by
developers, mining and logging sites and monocrop plantations of

146

Counter-Cartography Is Education

multinational corporations. After drawing their maps, all participants took turns in showing their maps and fortifying their work
with stories of their experiences in their communities. The workshop illustrates how cartographic representation of displacement
and other abuses can be supplemented by narratives.
Counter-Mapping through Pedagogy
Another series of counter-mapping activities involved university
students and professors who engage in solidarity work with indigenous peoples and farmers. At the University of the Philippines
(UP), critical cartography and counter-cartographies are conducted as participatory action projects. Being selectively integrated
into the content of several courses, they also contribute to enriching the activities of student organizations.
Since 2010, the Junior Philippine Geographic Society of UP
Diliman has been conducting a counter-mapping project called
Contour: Mapping for the People. With the aim of highlighting
the plight of marginalized communities impacted by development, the project uses a participatory mixed-use mapping approach that combines GIS techniques with qualitative methods.
Over the years, Contour has used counter-mapping to engage with
urban and rural communities, such as San Roque, an urban poor
community in Quezon City. The main aims were fighting against
informal settler demolition as well as the construction of new urban business districts. Another community was Hacienda Luisita,
a contested agricultural land in Central Luzon where farmers are
fighting for their right to collectivize and plant crops.
In the UP Department of Geography, undergraduate students of
the second semester of 2012-2013 launched a blog titled Cartography Mission: Mapping with a Cause, a mapping project that caters
to the needs of communities for organizing and visualizing spatial
data in support of human rights advocacies. Along with a geography graduate class, students took part in a participatory 3-dimensional mapping (P3DM) of the ancestral domain of the Agta-Dumagat-Remontado1, an indigenous group from the Quezon Province
at the southern foothills of the Sierra Madre mountain range. The
activity was organized by NGOs that assist indigenous peoples in
the process of ancestral domain claim-making2, the Non-Timber
Forest Product Exchange Programme for South and Southeast Asia
(NTFP) and Anthropology Watch (AnthroWatch). The students
provided assistance to the Agta-Dumagat-Remontados primarily
by preparing the materials that formed the base model for the 3-dimensional map (see photograph on previous spread). Aside from
observing and documenting the P3DM process, students helped
the elders and also conducted interviews with them and other participants like women and children. The goal was to obtain a better
understanding of their situation as a marginalized group, and to
elicit opinions on how the mapping activity could contribute to addressing their concerns and what they thought about the mapping
activity in general. While they were conducting these interviews,
the graduate students, who also participated in the field activity,
travelled to the Sentrong Paaralan ng mga Agta (SPA), an elementary school the Agta has established in the municipality of General
Nakar. Equipped with GPS receivers, they carried out an adhoc task
of helping teachers and elders to locate the boundary monuments
that delimit the perimeter of the school. The geolocated photos of
the spots where the property markers were located were then over-

lain on Google Earth with annotations, printed, and provided to the
elders a few months after the field visit.
Cartography Mission was conceptualized as a blog for student
projects that put emphasis on the map as a communication tool. The
project asserted the need to look beyond cartography as an academic
exercise for the production of maps. While the field visit was brief
and interaction with the community was limited, it had a significant
impact on the students in that they realized that mapping can be a
collective activity with the potential of revealing the realities of places for the marginalized sectors and help them share their situation.
Another project involved the creation of an online blog titled,
Cartodiem (everyday cartography for everyone). Launched in the
first semester of 2013-2014, Cartodiem sought to utilize mapping
technologies, cartographic communication theories, map design
principles and online media in order to bring maps and cartography to the forefront of information advocacy while promoting
spatial knowledge. It featured the Canlubang Counter Mapping
Study, which aimed to map the multiple spatial narratives of urban development in the former Canlubang Sugar Estate in the
province of Laguna. In Cartodiem, students used spatial data collected from interviews and site visits for producing three maps
that uncovered histories and lived realities of urban development:

1.

An animated map that shows the development of the
Canlubang estates. The team collected data from internet
sources, brochures and the websites of real estate developers.
The final map indicates the year that a particular development project or structure was established, a description of
the structure, the type of use that it serves (e.g. institutional,
commercial, etc.) and its size.

2.

A poster map on which the narratives of farmers and residents of Sitio Buntog (a village in Barangay Canlubang) are
geolocated and plotted on top of Google Earth imagery. The
students listened to interviews which were recorded by JPGS
members during field trips for a separate research project
conducted by Dr. Ortega and noted the places that were
mentioned by the interviewees, using Google Earth imagery
(see illustration above).

3.

A map that identifies the land use changes in Barangay
Canlubang (see illustration on next spread). Pictures showing recent developments in selected portions of the barangay
were added to the original content of the mentioned map.

Counter-Mapping for Resistance and Solidarity in the Philippines

147

In an article featured in the blog, two members of the class, Mr.
Socrates Mariano and Ms. Niel Anne Espiritu, wrote about their
experiences:
"The class of Geography 197 feels honored to take part in this
movement spearheaded by the people of Canlubang in their
quest for recapturing their lost rights. We are greatly pleased to
contribute our cartographic skills to the portrayal of the issues
and other problems they face through creative, effective and
constructive maps that aim to capture a clearer picture of their
struggles. As maps traditionally serve as a powerful ingredient
in the attainment of social change, we feel delighted that in some
way we have realized one of our roles of being a geographer,
‘mapping for a cause’."

Conclusion

The projects we featured in this chapter show how counter-mapping can be used in art and pedagogy. As exemplified by Cian Dayrit's work, art provides a medium to culturally resist hegemonic
representations of space and thus criticize neo-colonial development. At the same time, counter-mapping through art has the ability to gather and re-articulate narratives of marginalized communities who struggle against violence and dispossession.
Counter-mapping initiatives such as the workshops held
in protest spaces and the Canlubang counter-mapping project
demonstrate how narratives of marginalized populations may be
represented in multiple ways: from mental maps that were drawn
from memory and depict the tumultuous everyday life of indigenous communities to poster maps that used geospatial technologies in combining administrative data sources with field accounts.
Also, the projects not only show how counter-mapping provides
the mechanisms to resist and criticize development or neo-colonial discourses but also how it can facilitate land claims of indigenous peoples. In particular, geography students collaborated with
the Agta-Dumagat-Remontado group of the Quezon Province so
as to save their ancestral land by assisting in the creation of a 3-dimensional model of their community.
These experiences show how cartography is more than a set of
visual techniques for representing places. Moreover, the projects
reveal that it is equally important to emphasize the role of social
relations in the production of maps. In counter-mapping, solidarity and attainment of progressive goals serve as the main driving forces that interconnect students, teachers, activists and the
community. However, a critical concern for these projects is their
sustainability and scalability. Since these were mostly time-bound
initiatives and constrained by the lack of resources, sustaining collaboration with communities has been challenging. Also, as issues
confronting these communities evolve, updated maps need to be
generated and communicated. Given these challenges, we argue
for the need of sustainable counter-mapping projects that involve
multiple sectors and institutions.

148

Counter-Cartography Is Education

Endnotes
1. The indigenous group is represented by the Samahan ng Katutubong
Agta- Remontado Dumagat na Ipinaglalaban ang Lupang Ninuno (SAGUIBIN-LN), a local Peoples’ Organization (PO) from General Nakar,
Quezon Province.
2. In the Philippines, indigenous peoples need to undergo the process of
ancestral domain titling through self-delineation, as stipulated in the rules
and regulations implementing the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA)
of 1997, to attain entitlement to their ancestral lands and waters. Part of
this process is the submission of proof that includes historical accounts
of agreements on boundaries and descriptions of traditional landmarks
as well as surveys and sketch maps of the ancestral lands (The Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act, 1997). Several non-government and peoples’
organizations engage with the government and indigenous groups to
facilitate the consolidation of relevant documents with respect to the
requirements provided by the law mentioned above.
References
Cooke, F.M. 2003. Maps and Counter-Maps: Globalised Imaginings and Local
Realities of Sarawak’s Plantation Agriculture. Journal of Southeast Asian
Studies, 34(2): 265-284.
Harris, L.M. & Hazen, H.D. 2005. Power of Maps: (Counter) Mapping for
Conservation. ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies,
4(1): 99-130.
Hodgson, D.L. & Schroeder, R.A. 2002. Dilemmas of Counter-Mapping Community Resources in Tanzania. Development and Change, 33(1): 79-100.
Kelly, P.F. 2000. Landscapes of Globalization: Human Geographies of Economic
Change in the Philippines. First edition. London ; New York: Routledge.
Ortega, A.A. 2016. Neoliberalizing Spaces in the Philippines: Suburbanization,
Transnational Migration, and Dispossession. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Ortega, A.A., Acielo, J.M.A.E. & Hermida, M.C.H. 2015. Mega-regions in the
Philippines: Accounting for Special Economic Zones and Global-Local
Dynamics. Cities, 48: 130-139.
Parker, B. 2006. Constructing Community Through Maps? Power and Praxis in
Community Mapping. The Professional Geographer, 58(4): 470-484.
Republic of the Philippines. 1997. Republic Act No. 8371. The Indigenous
Peoples’ Rights Act of 1997. Manila, October 29.
officialgazette.gov.ph/1997/10/29/republic-act-no-8371, 19 April 2018.
Illustrations
Map on following spread left by Cian Dayrit: Objects of Colonial Desire 2017,
oil and collage on canvas (Seascapes: Tranquility and Agitation, Metropolitan
Museum)
Map on following spread right by Cian Dayrit: Mapa de la Isla de Buglas 2017,
tapestry (Almost There, Vargas Museum)
Photo at the beginning of the article by A. Vitug.

149

Mapping inside (and outside) the Classroom
Nicolás Frank, Fernanda García

152

Counter-Cartography Is Education

This reportage shows a collective process of knowledge production concerning a rural borderline region of Northeastern Uruguay. Getting to know the past and the present, and trying to
imagine the future, was the means to analyze its transformations.
By involving teachers, children and neighbours from five public
elementary schools of the region, along with university students
and professors of the Universidad de la República – UdelaR –
(Uruguayan public and mayor university) from different parts of
the country, we tried to re-construct the historical geography of
the way of living in the area. For this purpose we applied a wide
variety of techniques, such as social cartography, oral history, bibliographic review, field observations, interviews, photography,
contributing to an educational interdisciplinary, inter-cultural,
inter-institutional and inter-generational experiences.

These initial maps, which were as many as there were students
in the school, reflected the perception of their immediate reality. Every map was the materialization of an individual's mental
construction, which opened the way for further analysis about the
author's personal opinion about the presented issues. In addition,
as classes in rural schools are made up of children of various ages,
differences in map construction according to the children's ages
can be observed. On this basis, decisions were made and future
interventions were planned. That is how a walk through the area
was organized. Every child brought his or her own map, making it
possible that all children could become aware of the relation between what they had originally drawn and what they could see for
themselves. Some of them decided to modify their maps in order
to share it with their classmates afterwards.

Both activities described in this reportage took place in 2013. The
first one was a meeting of the public schools network of the region
called Agrupamiento Escolar Renacer. The second one was an encounter between 34th School and a group of Physical Education
students. These small rural schools have only one teacher and 5 to
15 students of different ages.

The next step was for the class to create a "group map". Every student's perception was included on this map, which enhanced the
map and enriched every child's experience by interacting with his
or her classmates. Even though it was a "non-scale" construction,
some cartographic elements, such as color codes or references,
were incorporated. These were identified by the children by analyzing other kinds of cartography usually found in the school's
regular activities. They included maps with topographic or thematic information, Uruguayan political subdivisions, world atlases, and the like.

One teaching goal of social science in elementary school is to prepare the students to live in society. For that purpose it becomes
necessary to invite them to think about the reality we live in, and
that this reality also has a spatial dimension. Being complex and always in motion are two main features of social reality. They make
mapping – and cartography as a language of geography – a rich
and versatile strategy. Maps were used in subsequent initiatives
setting the basis of what we already knew and as "communication
devices" with the help of which people of different origins, ages
and experiences were able to interact.

Mapping with the Children: Teaching Sequence

The sequence of activities that took place in 34th School started
with the concept of "place" as a spatial category of analysis regarding its subjective dimension based on personal experiences and a
sense of belonging. The students developed the maps of the area
they live in individually and without the intervention of teachers.

On the next level of analysis, satellite imagery was introduced,
by working with computers and the open platform Google Earth.
Other elements that had not been present in the previous maps
were included. Forests and plantation were identified, distances
between places were not what they had seemed to be, surfaces of
dams also looked different. The satellite view generated changes in
the way they perceived their own places. After printing the satellite
images they were compared with the "group map", establishing differences and similarities between both spatial representations. The
students identified places that were important to them – where
they played and had fun, places they enjoyed with their families,
paths and roads that were part of their daily routine, etc. Accordingly, some annotations and additional references were added to
the printed image by hand.

Mapping inside (and outside) the Classroom

153

In the end, the exercise – which was organized throughout the
school, using similar methodologies – included a space where the
groups could socialize and share their work with each other. By
doing so, maps were the spatial basis from where reflection was
promoted. By moving from the descriptions of the spaces to their
explanation, from known facts to "thinking reality", new knowledge that has the potential of being applied to other situations and
problems was gained. Working on a problem that involved all areas
of school made it possible to recognize and appreciate multi-causal social phenomena and the discussion about actions, actors and
intentions.

Inter-Generational Dialogue with and through Maps

The first activity occurred during a meeting of the various school
groups; it was organized to share thoughts and gather information
on the relationship between pesticides and human health. This relationship was discussed in a project held by the school groups, the
extension service of UdelaR and a group of neighbors from that
area. At the beginning of the meeting, every school presented their
maps. Afterwards the participants were provided with topographic base maps of their areas and had to locate, present and discuss
different activities which took place there. According to the topic
of the meeting, when mapping, special attention was paid to the
interaction between locations of production and the watersheds
of their areas. These maps provided a rich input for the meeting,
as well as for subsequent activities.
One of the activities enriched by these items was the second one
this reportage focuses on. It took place in 34th School in Cerro
Largo, Uruguay, located in Puntas del Chuy, and it is one of the
participants of the Agrupamiento Renacer. The school was visited
by a group of students from the Superior Institute of Physical Education of UdelaR (mostly from Montevideo, the capital of Uruguay, which is 400 kilometers further south), who were studying
the challenges and possibilities of physical education in rural areas
along with the University's extension service. The school children
presented the maps they had made about their area to the young
physical education students. The students encouraged the children
to think about the relationship between the education of the body

154

Counter-Cartography Is Education

in the countryside and the city, the games, the physical activities
and their environment. Together they analyzed the games, how
the children exercised on a daily basis, and the locations where
these physical activities took place. By taking a walk through the
areas they were able to map and discuss the spatial relations, that
had been established during other activities taking place in their
territory. An example of this is the relationship between the creek
where the children usually play and fish, and the new intensive
agriculture that is taking place in its watershed. This agriculture
includes the use of high amounts of pesticides and herbicides,
which can be harmful to their health. Mapping these spatial configurations isn't enough to establish causal relations about health
or environmental problems, but it enriches the collective process
of asking new questions.

Epilogue

These experiences show us that maps and the process of mapping
together are powerful communication tools. The combination of a
variety of elements, such as colors, shapes, textures, text and numbers, provides different ways of comprehension and contribution
at the same time. This is very important when working with students of various age groups or with adults from different social
contexts. They have not always fully developed their writing/
reading skills but nevertheless they have a lot to say about their territories. This way an important diversity of knowledge (academic/non-academic; local/foreign; adult/young child/elder) can be
a part of the spatial analysis and the gathering of large amounts of
information. The process of making maps on paper and/or other
materializations also makes it possible for them to be read and analyzed afterwards, promoting discussions held at different times
and places. Maps help to build a "common language" necessary for
communication as well as for the overcoming of cultural, territorial and generational boundaries.
Illustrations
All photographs by Jimena Quintero, Walter Oreggioni & Nicolás Frank PyCA-Project.

Mapping inside (and outside) the Classroom

155

Protest Map, Cartoon and Propaganda

1

The Hidden Object Map Right to the City
Marc Amann, Markus Wende
marcamann.net
animationsfilm.de

158

Counter-Cartography Is Education

The city from above. Birds-eye view. Comic style. Streets, buildings, places, gardens, 2000 characters. One big scene comprised
of many small places and situations. A construction site of an
expensive large-scale project, a gated community, a biotech laboratory. Protest actions against rising rents and displacement, for
feminism, against capitalism. Alternative economies, a community-supported vegetable plantation, housing projects, a factory occupation, an anti-racist protest camp. Struggles for the commons
and a good life for everyone.
The image is an invitation for rediscovering and recognizing,
for smiling and smirking, for questioning. It is a little bit of propaganda and a little bit of cartoon. It is chaotic and dynamic. For
children and adults.
In the last few years the hidden object format has experienced a
revival and uncountable hidden object maps, books in different
drawing styles and on different topics have come out. The format
opens up a lot of possibilities: Many scenes and stories can be incorporated in a condensed space, stimulating searching, finding
and one's imagination by creating connections between characters and scenes as well as one's own stories. The hidden object
map Right to the City hereby portrays a concentration of urban
conflicts and struggling for a good life. The picture represents fiction just as much as it represents the truth. It is inspired by encounters, events and struggles. Most of the scenes are the result of
places, events, projects and interventions that really exist or took
place. The fare-evasion metro in Stuttgart, the riot dog Louk from
Greece or the squatting elders from Berlin. Known motifs, logos
and also some real people can be recognized.
Often the portrayed protests, events and projects are not shown
in a common context they are not told as one coherent story. This
leads to the impression that there are many different unconnected struggles as well as protests and forms of resistance on the one
hand but also alternatives and possibilities on the other hand.
What connects everything, though, is the bird's-eye perspective.
As a map, the hidden object map connects the portrayed places
and social struggles with each other. Leading through streets and
places, the hidden object map leads past the demands of refugees

for social participation just as it does for the disabled, the unemployed, queer or transgender people. The wealth on the one side
of the street is opposed by the poverty on the other side of the
street. The title Right to the City refers to a self-designation of
many urban initiatives all around the globe that demand the access and participation of all residents – and most of all the socially
disadvantaged – to the resources of urban society and the right to
self-organization and the ability to try new forms of living.
The hidden object map Right to the City was published online,
printed and distributed freely in 2016. It is decoration and entertainment as well as educational material and propaganda at the
same time. It is put on the walls of kitchens co-tenants share as
well as in offices, on the bulletin boards of repair cafés and in the
community greens. It can be found at critical mass network meetings as well as in open workshops. Teachers and educators use it
in schools, kindergartens or day-care centers. Activists use it in
workshops to explain protest forms and alternative approaches of
social movements. Some parents have put it on the walls of their
children's rooms in order to explain to them which great actions
and projects they have participated in (hopefully their children
don't find this boring).
But the best way to explore the picture is being at leisure and looking at it on the wall of a restroom – or online where you can zoom
into a detailed view of all the scenes and characters:
wimmelbild.animationsfilm.de/wimmelbild-recht-auf-stadt/
Endnotes
1. This article and all its illustrations are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License (CC
BY-NC-ND 4.0).
Illustrations
Hidden object map by Markus Wende based on the idea of Marc Amann

Protest Map, Cartoon and Propaganda

159

HOW TO

BECOME
AN OCCASIONAL
CARTOGRAPHER
INSIGHTS INTO VARIOUS MAPPING GUIDES

AS A STARTING POINT FOR YOUR PRACTICE

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer

Insights into Various Mapping Guides as a Starting Point for Your Practice
Not-an-Atlas emerges as an attempt to
provide insights into the staggering heterogeneity of contexts in which collectives and individuals apply mapping as a
manifold tool to underpin their matters.
We try to offer a collection that inspires
experienced as well as emerging cartographers. The following material for
practical involvement invites readers to
become occasional cartographers themselves. It presents three excerpts from
existing mapping guides that introduce
basic practical know-how for mapping
processes.
Firstly, in their guide John Krygier and
Denis Wood lead through the major
steps in mapping processes. They highlight the identification of the public to
be addressed and the objectives of the
mapping, the use of relevant data and
the documentation and critical analysis
of the latter. Secondly, the Iconoclasistas
propose collective mapping as a strategic tool for organizing group processes
and challenging hegemonic positions.
Readers are encouraged to develop
their own mapping practice by using
visual resources to stimulate interventions and by considering eleven theses
for occasional cartographers. Thirdly,
Anna Hirschmann, Raphael Kiczka and
Florian Ledermann address problems
that may arise within solidary mapping
projects, such as instrumentalized data
and heteronomous representations.
They present an approach for coping
with sensitive issues by drawing more
attention to the needs of the mapped
actors.
Hence, when becoming an occasional
cartographer, we suggest to have these
mapping guides at hand, to adapt the
proposed techniques to your local
contexts and to create new tools for your
struggles. Finally, by sharing your material and insights you can inspire other
counter-cartographers!

164

How to Become
Manual:
How to an
become
Occasional
an occasional
Cartographer?
cartographer?

Making Maps: A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS
Second Edition 2011 - Guilford Press
(Third Edition already available!)

Manual of Collective Mapping: Critical Cartographic Resources
for Territorial Processes of Collaborative Creation
English Edition 2016
iconoclasistas.net/mapeo-colectivo

Ein Leitfaden für solidarisches Kartieren
German Version 2014
platzda.blogsport.eu

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

165

Making Maps is Hard
Whether looking at or making maps, there is a
lot to see, think about and do. Throughout this
book, myriad subjects are considered in general
and in relation to The Flight of Voyager map.
A systematic critique of an existing map or the
successful making of your own map is accomplished by considering the following issues.
When making maps, think about everything before starting; Then, when your map is complete,
reconsider them all again.

166

Manual:
How to an
become
an occasional
cartographer?
How
to Become
Occasional
Cartographer?

The Whole Map

The Map's Data

Write out exactly what the map is supposed to accomplish:
Does the map meet its goals?

Do the data serve the goals of the map?

Are you sure a map is necessary?
Is the map suitable for the intended audience?
Will the audience be confused, bored, interested or informed?
Look at the map in its final medium: Does it work? Has the potential of a black-and-white or color design been reached?
Is the map, its authors, its data and any other relevant information documented and accessible to the map reader?
Look at the map and assess what you see; is it:

Is the relationship between the data and the
phenomena they are based on clear?
Does the map symbolization reflect the character
of the phenomena or the character of the data?
Does the origin of the data – primary, secondary,
tertiary – have any implications?
Are the data too generalized or too complex,
given the goals of the map?
Is the map maker's interpretation of the data sound?
Are qualitative and quantitative characteristics
of the data effectively symbolized?

•

confusing or clear

•

interesting or boring

•

lopsided or balanced

•

amorphous or structured

•

light or dark

•

neat or sloppy

•

fragmented or coherent

•

constrained or lavish

What about the accuracy of the data? Are the facts complete?
Are things where they should be? Does detail vary? When were
the data collected? Are they from a trustworthy source?

•

crude or elegant

Have you consulted metadata (data about data)?

•

random or ordered

•

modern or traditional

Does the map maker document copyright issues
related to the data?

•

hard or soft

Is the map copyright or copyleft licensed?

•

crowded or empty

•

bold or timid

•

tentative or finished

•

free or bounded

•

subtle or blatant

•

flexible or rigid

•

high-contrast or low-contrast

•

authoritative or unauthoritative

•

complex or simple

•

appropriate or inappropriate

Have the data been properly derived?
Has the temporal character of the data been
properly understood and symbolized?
Is the scale of the map (and inset) adequate,
given the goals of the map?

Given the goals of the map, are any of these
impressions inappropriate?

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

167

What's Your Map For?
What was Twain's map of Paris for? To make us laugh. But first
it was to make Twain laugh. It was a dark time for Twain. "He
swung between deep melancholy and half-insane tempests
and cyclones of humor." In one of the latter moments, "he got
a board and with a jackknife carved a 'crude and absurd' map of
Paris under siege." The map was a parody of those found in the
newspapers of the time and was wildly popular. Who's your map
for? How will you show it? How will you document, evaluate and
review it? Your answers will profoundly shape your map.

168

Manual:
How to an
become
an occasional
cartographer?
How
to Become
Occasional
Cartographer?

But Do You Really Need a Map?
The first thing you need to decide is whether you need a map.
You may not. There are secrets that don’t want to be mapped.
There are circumstances where maps are inappropriate. And
sometimes there are more effective ways of making your point: a
graph, a drawing, a photo.

The Secret

The Silly

Sometimes it’s better not to map stuff you could easily map. Military sites, sacred indigenous locations and archaeological sites
are often left off of maps.

“How surprised are you that Chicago has been eliminated from
the potential host cities for the 2016 Olympics?”

The U.S. Geological Survey topographic map of Raven Rock
Mountain in Pennsylvania (above) doesn’t show the extensive
infrastructure of “Site R” — the bunker where U.S. Vice President
Dick Cheney hunkered down after 9/11. Architect John Young
tracked down the missing data and mapped it as part of his cryptome.org Eyeballing project (below).

The Not Mappable
Typically land claims by native peoples are accompanied by
maps. This is so obviously the place for a map that it seems
perverse to question it, but increasingly Indigenous peoples have
been arguing that maps can’t capture their relationship to the
land.
In 1987 the Gitxsan and the Wet’suwet’en in British Columbia
entered the Gitxsan adaawk (a collection of sacred oral traditions
about their ancestors, histories and territories) and the Wet’suwet’en kungax (a spiritual song or dance or performance tying
them to the land) as evidence in their suit seeking title to their
ancestral lands. In 1997 the Canadian Supreme Court found that
forms of evidence like these had to be accepted in Canadian
courts.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

169

Who's Your Map For?
Knowing the intended audience for your map will help you design
it. Your audience may or may not be familiar with the area being
mapped, an expert on the mapped topic or a novice, an eightyear-old or a college student. In each case, consider how your
map can function better for the people who will actually use it.

Experts
Experts know a lot about the subject of the map. Experts are
highly motivated and very interested in the facts the map
presents. They expect more substance and expect to engage a
complex map.
•

Less peripheral information on map explaining content and
symbols

•

More information, more variables of information, more detail

•

Follow conventions of experts: consider using a spectral
(rainbow) color scheme for ordered data if the user is accustomed to using such colors to show ordered data (such
schemes are usually not good for other users)

Novices
Novices know less about the map subject and may not be familiar with the way maps are symbolized. They need a map that is
more explanatory. Novices may be less motivated than expert
users, but they want the map to help them learn something.
•

More peripheral information on map explaining content and symbols
•

Less information, fewer variables of information,
less detail
•

Follow map design conventions, which
enhance comprehension of the map

Mike...
Social worker Mike Rakouskas's map of Wake County, North
Carolina. The numbers refer to pages in the county street atlas he
uses, and the shaded numbers are client sites. He uses this map
to rationalize his trip planning and as an index to the atlas. It was
made with a word processor. Peculiar! Clever! And perfect for
Mike.

170

Manual:
How to an
become
an occasional
cartographer?
How to Become
Occasional
Cartographer?

How Are You Going to Show It?
Consider the final medium of your map before making it. Most
maps are made on computer monitors, but the monitor is not
the final medium. Rather, it might be a cell phone screen, a piece
of paper, a poster, a slide projected on a screen during a presentation, a yard sign, handbill or protest sign. What looks great
on your computer will probably not look so great when
printed or projected or shown on a tiny phone
screen.

A
yard
sign complete with map in
opposition to a road that
would really mess up a lot of
stuff in Raleigh, North Carolina.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

171

Black and White, on Paper
Most maps are created on computer monitors, with less resolution and area than is possible on a piece of paper. When paper is
your final medium, design for the paper and not for the monitor.
Always check design decisions by printing the map (or having
your printer create a proof if your map is to be professionally
printed). While all computers offer color, final printing with color
is not always an option. Don’t despair! Much can be done with
black and white.
Map size should match final paper size, with appropriate margins.
10-point type works well on a printed map, but you may have to
zoom in to see it on the computer monitor.
Point and line symbols can be smaller and finer on a printed map
than on the computer.
More subtle patterns can be used than on a computer monitor map.
More data and more complex data can be included on a printed map.
Substitute a range of grays and black and white for color. Remember that printers cannot always display as many grays as
you can create on a monitor; subtle variations in grays may not
print clearly.
Black will be more intense than white; use white to designate no
information or the background, dark to designate more important information.
Monochrome copiers sometimes reproduce gray tones poorly.
Very light gray tones may not print.

172

Manual:
How to an
become
an occasional
cartographer?
How
to Become
Occasional
Cartographer?

Color, on Paper
Color on a computer monitor is created in a different manner
than color on desktop printers or on professionally printed maps.
Select colors on the computer, then print and evaluate (or ask for
a proof). Always design for the final medium: Adjust the colors
on the monitor so they look best for the final output. The same
colors will vary from printer to printer. Reproducing color is often
more expensive than black and white. Finally, keep in mind that
users may reproduce your color map in black and white. Will it
still work?
Map size should match final paper size, with appropriate margins.
10-point type works well on a printed map but you may have to
zoom to see it on the computer monitor.
Point and line symbols can be smaller and finer on a printed map.
More subtle patterns can be used than on
a computer monitor map.
More data and more complex data can be included on
a printed map.
Use color value (e.g., light red vs. dark red) to show differences
in amount or importance. Use color hue (blue vs. red) to show
differences in kind. Desktop printers cannot display as many
colors as you can create on a monitor; subtle variations in colors
may not print.
Dark colors are more intense than light; use light colors to designate less important information and background, and dark to
designate more important information.
Never print a color map in black and white; redesign it
for black and white.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

173

Computer Monitors
Designing maps for final display on a computer must take screen resolution and space
limits into account. Desk or laptop computer
monitor resolution is typically 72 dots per inch
(dpi), compared to 1200 or more for many
printers. Computer monitors also have limited
area, typically 7 by 9 inches, or less if the map
is displayed in a web browser window. Design
a map so that all type and symbols are visible
without magnification. Also avoid maps that
require the viewer to scroll around to see the
entire map. Use more than one map if you
need more detail, or consider web tools that
allow you to zoom and pan over a map.
The entire map should fit on the screen without scrolling (if pan/zoom is not possible).
Increase type size: 14 point type is the smallest you should use on a monitor.
Make point and line symbols 15% larger than
those on a paper map.
Use more distinct patterns: avoid pattern variations that are too fine or detailed.
You may have to limit the amount and complexity of data on your map compared to a
print map.
Use color but remember that some monitors
cannot display billions of colors; subtle color
variations may not be visible on every monitor.
White is more intense than black. Take care
when using white to designate the lack of information or as background color, it may stand
out too much.
Save static maps for the internet at 72-150
dpi. Size the map to fit in a browser window.
Design your map so it works on different
monitors (RGB, LCD, portables).
Interactive maps require attention to additional issues, such as pan, zoom, interactivity, etc.

Portable Monitors
Maps on smart phones, PDAs, GPS units, and other
portable devices pose the same design challenges
as on desktop monitors, with the further limitation
of screen size. Typical portable monitor sizes are
shown on this spread. Many portable monitors are
touch-sensitive, allowing users to pan and zoom,
thus overcoming some of the limitations of the
small monitor size.
Static maps on portable devices can follow desktop
monitor design guidelines, taking into account ‘the
limited display size into acount.
Interactive maps should use appropriate interface
metaphors: Zooming in is “up” on a slider bar, or two
fingers diverging outward. Pan is touch and slide in
the appropriate direction.
Interactive maps should vary map design specifications with scale.
Generalize more as the user zooms out on the map:
For example, local roads and road names disappear
when zoomed out.
Generalize less as the user zooms in on the map: Local roads and their names appear when zoomed in.
Aerial photographs may be more appropriate than
maps for users with limited navigation abilities.
Ground-view images may be more helpful for
navigation than maps alone, but using both should
increase navigation success.
Map symbols should not be too complex.
Colors should be more intense to account for varying lighting conditions.
Serif fonts may be easier to read on portable monitors than sans serif.

174

How to Become
Manual:
How to an
become
Occasional
an occasional
Cartographer?
cartographer?

Projections
It is increasingly common for maps to be shown on
a large screen with a computer projector. When projected, white and lighter colors will be more intense,
black and darker colors subdued. Computer projectors vary in the amount of light they can project.
Some projectors wash out colors. Consider previewing your projected map and adjusting the projector.
Projected maps must be designed with the viewing
distance in mind (find out the size of the room). A
map projected to an audience in a small room can
have smaller type and symbols than a map projected in an auditorium. Always check that the map is
legible from the back of the room in which the map
will be displayed.
Greater map size is offset by the increased viewing
distance.
Increase type size so that the smallest type is legible
from the back of the room.
Increase point and line symbol size to be legible
from the back of the room.
More distinct patterns: Avoid pattern variations that
are too fine or detailed.
You may have to limit the amount and complexity
of data on your map compared to print maps.
Older or lower-output projectors may wash out
colors, so intensify your colors for projection.
If your map will be projected in a dark room, use
black as background, darker colors for less important
information and lighter colors for more important
information.
If your map will be projected in a well-lighted room,
use white as background, lighter colors for less
important information and darker colors for more
important information.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

175

Posters
Posters are similar to projected maps, although
usually viewed in well-lighted conditions.
Viewers should be able to see key components
of the map (such as the title) from afar, then
walk up to the map and get more detail. Design
the poster so information can be seen both
close and at a distance. The size of poster maps
is limited by the largest printer you can use;
always check color and resolution of the printer
used to reproduce your poster. You may want to
request a test print of the colors you plan to use
to evaluate your color choices.
Design map title and mapped area so they are
legible from across the room.
The majority of type, point and line symbols
should be slightly larger than on a typical
printed map but not as large as on a monitor or
projected map. Design this part of the map so it
is legible at arm’s length.
More complex information can be included on
a poster map than on a computer monitor or
projected map.
Follow color conventions for color-printed
maps. Most posters are viewed in a well-lighted
room, so use white as background, lighter colors
for less important information and darker colors
for more important information.
Left: A portion of the poster-sized map Guide
Psychogeographique OWU, made by a group of
middle-school students and John Krygier during
a summer class, Mapping Weird Stuff, at Ohio
Wesleyan University, June 2009.

176

How to Become
Manual:
How to an
become
Occasional
an occasional
Cartographer?
cartographer?

Document, Evaluate, Review
Constantly cast a critical eye on your work. Document what
you do and continually evaluate whether the map is serving its
intended goal, meeting the needs of its intended audience and
working well in its final medium.
NASA’s Bob Craddock set about revising a 1986 map of Mars with
new imagery from the Viking Orbiter. Craddock transferred details from the 1986 map while referencing his new data, drawing
lines and labeling what he thought he saw, evaluating the data as
he worked. Craddock used the old interpretations when the new
data supported them and modified features clarified by the new
data.
When complete, the new map was sent to other experts for review and evaluation. The reviewers annotated the map wherever
they disagreed with Craddock’s interpretations or saw alternatives. Craddock, in turn, revised his map with the reviewers’ comments, not necessarily agreeing with all of them but, in the end,
producing a map of the geology of Mars that was better because
of the expert evaluation and review.

Documentation
What were those six great shades of red I used on that map I
made last month? What font did I use on the last poster map I
made? How big was the title type? How long did it take me to
make that map for the annual report last year? Where did we
get that great data set? Was it licensed? Who printed that large
format map for us last year? How much did it cost to print and
fold those color maps?
Documentation of the details involved in making a map may
seem tedious but can save time and effort in future map making, both for yourself and others who may need to make similar
maps. Working toward a few general styles that are effective for
specific types of commonly produced maps is useful. Documentation of mapped data is vital if the map is to be published.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

177

Documenting General Issues

Formative Evaluation

Document your goal for the map and

Ongoing formative evaluation is as simple as asking yourself
whether the map is achieving its goals throughout the process
of making the map. Formative evaluation implies that you will
“re-form” the map so it works better or maybe even dump it! It is
never too late to bail out if the map is not serving your needs. It is
a good idea to ask others to evaluate your map as well: What do
you think of those colors? Can you read that type from the back
of the room? Does what is most important on the map actually
stand out? What is the boss going to think? Simply engaging
your mind as you make your map, and being open to critique and
change, will lead to a better map.

...the intended audience and what you know about them
...the final medium and details about the medium that will
affect map design and reproduction
...the amount of time it takes to create the map, and any
major problems and how you solved them
Keep copies of the map as well as information on where it
was published or presented
Documenting Data
Document the source of the data, including contact
information and copyright information

Ask yourself...

...the age, quality, and any limitations of the data

Will this map make sense to the audience I envision for it?

...how the data were processed into a form
appropriate for mapping

How does the map look when printed, projected, or viewed in
the final medium, and what changes will make it better?

...map projection and coordinate system information

Are the chosen scale, coordinate system and map projection
appropriate?

Documenting Design

Do the layout of the map and the map legend look good? Could
it be adjusted to help make the map look better and easier to
interpret?

Document specifics of map size, scale, and sketches of
layouts
...a list of information on the map, arranged in terms of
importance, and associated symbols
...data classification and generalization information
...sources and details of map symbols

Is this map doing what I want it to do?

Does the most important information on the map stand out visually? Does less important information fall into the background?
Are data on the map too generalized or too detailed, given the
intent of the map?

...details of type size, font, etc.

Does the way I classified my facts help to make sense of them?
Would a different classification change the patterns much?

...color specifications for all colors used

Do chosen symbols make sense, and are they legible?

...design problems encountered and solutions

Is the type appropriate, legible, and is its size appropriate, given
the final medium?

...software problems encountered and solutions

Is color use logical (e.g., value for ordered data, hue for qualitative
data) and appropriate, and will the chosen colors work in the final
medium?
Do I want a series of simpler maps, or one more complicated one?
Is a handout map needed, if presenting a map on a poster or
projected?
...then re-form your map.

178

How to Become
Manual:
How to an
become
Occasional
an occasional
Cartographer?
cartographer?

Impact Evaluation
Impact evaluation is a range of informal and formal methods for
evaluating the finished map. It may be your boss or a publisher
reviewing the map, or it may be public feedback on the efficacy.
You should begin any map making with a clear sense of who may
have the final say on the acceptability of your map, and factor
in their wants, needs, and requirements at the beginning of the
process.
Caribou Calving Areas
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR)

Ian Thomas, a contractor for the U.S. Geological Survey, was
fired, allegedly for making maps of caribou calving areas in the
ecologically and politically sensitive Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Thomas argues he was fired for publicizing facts that would
undermine the push for oil exploration in the refuge. Others claim
the maps were of out-of-date information beyond Thomas’s area
of expertise and had nothing to do with his being fired. In either
case, it is obvious that making maps can piss off your boss.
An old Japanese map from the David Rumsey digital map collection was added to Google Earth in early 2009. A label on the
map described a village as populated by “eta,” the untouchable
caste of burakumin (translation, “filthy mass”). Because some
idiots in Japan discriminate against the burakumin, it is common
practice to remove such references. Rumsey initially decided not
to censor the map, but after an uproar the offending nomenclature was removed.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

179

The Flight Of Voyager map was published in 1987 in the book Voyager by
Jeana Yeager, Dick Rutan and Phil Patton.

David DiBiase and John Krygier designed
and made a map to tell the story of Voyager and its pilots. The map was created
for a map design course at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison taught by David
Woodward.

180

How to Become
Manual:
How to an
become
Occasional
an occasional
Cartographer?
cartographer?

The map was split between the front and
back book end-papers, half in the front
and half in the back. Each endpaper was
9” high and 12” wide.

The map was made for readers of the
book Voyager (1987) with its general,
educated audience, including those with
a specialist interest in flight and aerospace. Given the audience, the map was
designed to contain a significant amount
of information, including detailed data,
sure to resonate with pilots.

The map was designed to be viewed
at arm’s length.

The publisher of Voyager, Knopf, allowed
us black and one color for the map. We
chose deep red for the most important
information (such as the flight path and
related text). The map was redesigned in
monochrome for Making Maps, 2nd Ed.
The map still works!

Details of the design of the map — line
weights, type size, percent gray of different areas on the map, etc. — were
documented, as we were taught in David
Woodward’s course and at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Cartographic
Lab. Formative evaluation was ongoing
throughout the process, and the editors at
Knopf provided the final edit and evaluation of the map.

Making Maps – A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS

181

182

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

183

184

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

185

186

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

187

188

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

189

190

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

191

192

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

193

194

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

195

196

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

197

198

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

199

200

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

201

202

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Manual of Collective Mapping

203

204

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

A

g
n
i
p
p
a
,
M
y
rmann
e
r
d
e
a
L
n
d
i
l
, Floria
o
a
k
S
z
, 2013)
c
i
a
r
n
K
l
n
e
e
o
i
a
V
f
h
(
e
n
nn, Rap
rkshop
i
a
o
l
m
W
h
g
c
e
n
s
i
ir
pp
Anna H
ar y Ma
Guid
e
ts of th
n
a
p
i
c
i
part

Solid

A Guideline for Solidary Mapping

205

Introduction

Topics

Cartography, mapping, making maps. All of these often lead to
fascination in solidary and emancipative contexts of all sorts.
A map can be used as a tool in order to show the spreading
of ideas. It can be used in order to visualize threats, conflicts
or potentials. The relation between mappers on the one hand
and mapped initiatives on the other hand is often not easy.
Not everyone wants to be put on a map, and not always does
everyone share the same perspective on the depicted reality.

I. "Respect Other People's Sovereignty of Self-Expression!"
Maps represent a selective view on the world. Content and
circumstances are brought into relation. They delineate, and
the single facts do not speak for themselves anymore. Maps
are always based on analyses and views which can never conform with a general truth. At the same time, maps somehow
seem reliable, objective and suggest they could show "everything that is important". The critique of the ideological or reality-constructing character of a hegemonic map also holds
true for any alternative mapping!

This guideline should be understood as motivation to deal
sensibly with possible problems that may arise within mapping projects, as well as with the relationships these problems
may create in the context of their surroundings. The guideline
can be understood as a basis for the specification of sensitive
or difficult topics or the precise visualization of these topics
as a result of such a process.
The suggestions in this guideline cannot and should not be
understood as "rules". Initiatives decide autonomously about
their mapping practice. Nevertheless, the guideline can help
to better visualize and show the root of a problem, so that
decisions can be made consciously and these decisions can
also be reconstructed and understood by outsiders.
The approaches and questions in the guideline were created
in the context of a workshop which was collectively organized
at the congress that focused on solidary economy in Vienna
in 2013 by the people from "Platz da!?" (platzda.blogsport.eu)
and "Vivir Bien" (an online mapping project of solidary economy initiatives, active from 2009 to 2015).
The motivation for the workshop originated from experiences
that were made in mapping projects, in which conflicts and
pressures were revealed: While most of the mapped initiatives found the generated publicity helpful for their agenda
and supported it, there were also those who found themselves being instrumentalized and limited in their self-definition and self-representation. They did not want to be linked
with initiatives that did not share their political views and interests. The concrete disputes with these initiatives referred
to general questions, which made it preferable to deliberately connect those who mapped and those who were being
mapped in order to find a suitable way of dealing with these
issues. The texts on the three topics that evolved are based
on a mind map which was developed in the workshop.

206

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

It is exactly this character, that can turn an alternative map
into a powerful, subversive and thought-provoking irritation.
But all people involved in the mapping should be in agreement with this. Whoever maps groups or projects should ask
these beforehand how they feel about being represented in
the contexts these maps create.
Solidary mappings can furthermore generate a collective value of knowledge and dispute, if the first idea of mapping with
all the represented individuals is opened for collective reflection and further developed. If the mapped "subjects" are at the
same time involved in the production, this may lead to the mapping being more of a self-portrayal than an unwanted portrayal
by somebody else. And this most likely leads to a better diffusion of the product and will probably make everyone involved
happier. At the same time it is often sensible to consciously exclude certain actors. Grievances can rarely be mapped if the individuals responsible for these grievances are able to take part
in the mapping process themselves. The objective of the map
determines who should be mapping. As a tool for resistance,
maps attack (hegemonic) interests, stories and perspectives.
This does not require asking anyone for permission.
Needs of others
• They want to know that they are "being mapped".
• They want to know about the aim, the users
and the statements of your map.
• They want to be able to decide which information
about them is published where.
• They may want to remain anonymous.
Suggestions
• Let others know early in advance that you would
like them to be represented on your map.
• Document the objective, potential users as well as
the statement you want to make with your map.
• Let others participate in the way how and in which relation their project is presented on your map.
• Offer a direct option to correct data and give feedback.

II. "Show a Colorful World!"
The historical evolution of maps is tightly connected to the
development of national states and their instruments of governing and power. Maps have formed the representative basis for claiming borders, hierarchies and order, and they still
do. If a general city street map shows highways as large and
bold without depicting any bike lanes, we can clearly see the
meaning and value of bicycles in comparison to cars within
urban traffic. Generally, official and commercial maps tend
to represent hegemonic power relations of the state and the
market.
Opposing this is the reclaiming of a possible other world
through emancipatory projects, and this is also how mapping
projects can attempt a critical approach towards the visual
basis of their maps. Maybe it would be helpful for the mapped
topics not to cite the ruling power structures.
Euclidian geometrical space does not necessarily represent
the best structure of an alternative perspective on the world.
Associative mind maps, relational maps and networks, scribble maps or fictitious spaces all represent alternatives to the
established, mathematically and technically structured views
on the world.
Needs of others
• Neither do they want to see their projects from a "governmental view" nor do they want to have to look at
these kinds of maps over and over again.
• They want to autonomously interpret your maps without
being instructed how to do so – they want to be able to
find their way with your map but also to discover new
things.

III. "Create Commons!"
In the world of capitalism every single output, even media
and information products, are by default subject to market
and property logics. This means that, technically and legally
speaking, your map or information collection can be viewed
but not shared, modified or remixed by other people as long
as you have not explicitly stated otherwise. This is contrasted
by attempts such as those of the Commons movement or the
Free and Open Source Software scene, whose goals it is to
share and use resources as freely as possible.
Common tools for turning your map into a common resource
are the licenses of Creative Commons. With the Creative
Commons licenses you can easily define the precise ways in
which other people can or cannot use your data or your map.
In order to do so, it is enough to state that the work is protected by the chosen license and to link it to the license text.
Other approaches, such as Public Domain or the "Do What
The Fuck You Want To Public License" try to disconnect the
work as much as legally possible from the copyright law.
Needs of others
• They want to use public data in other contexts.
• They may want to carry on and establish new projects
based on your work.
• They want to update existing and contribute new data.
Suggestions
• Choose an open license for your map.
• Use other commons.
• Offer a direct option to give feedback
as well as to correct data.

Suggestions
• Design your map!
• Create your map in different scales and representations.
• Use alternatives to known map techniques and spatial
conceptualizations, and use your imagination in order to
find the format that is most useful for you. Sometimes
the most useful map is the one that looks the least like
it...

A Guideline for Solidary Mapping

207

GO,
OCCASIONAL
CARTOGRAPHER,
GO!
208

How to Become an Occasional Cartographer?

Counter-Cartographies
Create Visibility

Counter-Mapping Militant Research

1

Counter Cartographies Collective
Liz Mason-Deese, Craig Dalton, Nathan Swanson, Tim Stallmann, Maribel Casas-Cortes, Sebastian Cobarrubias
countercartographies.org

212

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

As a collective with diverse ties to the university factory – adjuncts, fellows, freelancers, indebted graduate students, assistant
professors under review, unemployed PhDs and caregivers – how
do we situate ourselves in relation to increasingly undemocratic
and exploitative infrastructures of higher education? How can
we confront everyday precarity2 due to lack of access to housing,
knowledge, healthcare, mobility, and employment? How can we
organize to produce alternatives and reclaim life within and beyond the university?
As the Counter Cartographies Collective (3Cs), we map. Beginning with our own situations, we create a mapping of and for
political change, combining militant research with counter-mapping to produce alternative ways of visualizing and inhabiting our
university and world. Our mapping is grounded in the tradition of
autonomous politics: emphasizing the power and creativity of labor over that of capital, realizing the need to go beyond state-centered activism and work for political change from below, and recognizing the centrality of struggles around knowledge production
in the current political-economic context. As militant research,
autonomous mapping simultaneously produces analyses and political interventions, helping us to understand and challenge the
changing spaces of oppression where production/reproduction
are geographically diffuse.
We use autonomous cartography to analyze and intervene in
processes at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and,
through collaboration, at other institutions around the world. This
mapping prompts critical and reflexive self-organizing cognizant
of the many forms of labor at the university and the university's
role in the broader economy and social fabric. 3Cs' autonomous
cartography creates non-hierarchical relationships within our collective as well as open identities and unexpected alliances as people interact with our maps and begin to enact their university in
new ways.

A University Drift

3Cs first formed not with a set mission or clear goals, but as an affinity group with common interests and methodological commitments. We were frustrated by talk among activist scholars on campus limited to their own field research sites. Much of this work
attempts to contest divisions between academia and activism, yet
reinforces the divide by geographically separating intellectual production within the university from activism outside. We wanted
to do something politically and intellectually relevant to all of us
instead. An opportunity arose when our university administration
selectively canceled the Labor Day holiday, giving the administration the day off, but not students, educators or researchers. How
to protest? Where to protest? Was this a labor protest? How could
we, through understanding this situation, begin to enact a different university?
For us, these questions resonated closely with those of Precarias a la Deriva (Precarious Women Adrift), a self-identified militant research project based in Madrid, who developed geographic
interventions using feminist drifts and picket-surveys. When major labor unions in Spain called a general strike in 2002, several
women realized they were not in a position to participate. How
could temp workers, the self-employed, workers on per-hour con-

tracts, and domestic workers strike? Who would even notice? To
address these questions, Precarias developed a technique of feminist drifting. The drifts visited sites of precarious labor where
workers were unable to participate in the general strike and asked
a provocative question: What is your strike? Or what does it mean
to go on strike in your situation? (Precarias a la Deriva, 2006).
Asking this question served multiple purposes. Firstly, it stopped
the production process for a few minutes: a mini-strike. Secondly, it investigated the conditions of work/life in the contemporary
economy. Thirdly, it established connections among a disparate
group of workers for future organizing.
In each drift, a different precaria would lead the group of drifters through their everyday trajectory, discussing their lives and answering questions along the way. As opposed to the Situationists'
use of the derivation to understand the literal structure of the city,
the Precarias' drift is a directed itinerary through the specific conditions of their personal everyday lives. Drifting was useful for exploring the spatial practices of precarious workers, who are often
not confined to a singular or stationary workplace, allowing them
to find intersection points between distinct and atomized itineraries in urban space, pointing to hierarchies and differences, as
well as commonalities among different forms of labor.
Inspired by Precarias a la Deriva's query, "what is your strike?",
we began our own drift on Labor Day. We set up at the social hub
of campus with chalkboards, signs, paper and recording devices. We asked passers-by to talk about their own work by drawing
maps and participating in interviews. We drifted through campus,
visiting working classrooms and closed-for-the-holiday offices,
mapping where work was or was not taking place.
The drift proved useful in its dual nature as research and spatial intervention. It provoked multiple reactions: confusing reporters as to whether it was "research" or a "protest", and encouraging students and faculty to reflect on their own labor. It was a
way to explore spaces and inhabit them differently. While our
suburban college town is very different from Madrid, we found
many similarities with the precarias' experiences. Many people we
talked to worked on temporary contracts with little job security,
some worked multiple jobs or part-time with no fixed hours and
low pay. As our research continued, we found an expensive and
growing administration separated from the concerns of university
workers. We found a push for privately funded research in competition for prestige. We found infrastructure designed to blur the
lines between work and leisure to spark "entrepreneurship", a specific subjectivity of the knowledge worker (Holmes, 2007).

The University Factory

We began to understand how our own daily activities in the university – our research, writing, volunteering, learning, and teaching – were work, productive labor enmeshed in the relationships
of surplus and management of post-Fordist capitalism. Using
concepts such as the social factory and general intellect, we were
able to recognize the role of collective social knowledge in production and how that production occurs throughout the social
field, involving diverse forms of labor. Theorists of cognitive
capitalism, the commercialization of general intellect, recognize
the university as a key site of value production and class struggle

Counter-Mapping Militant Research

213

(Edu-Factory Collective, 2008), since immaterial, affective, and
intellectual labor are increasingly important for producing value in the post-Fordist system (Lazzarato, 1996; Hardt & Negri,
2000). Even student leisure time can produce value within the
social factory of the university by adding to the university brand
(Bousquet, 2008). These open definitions of labor allowed us to
recenter our understanding of how the university works based on
women's unpaid domestic labor, the production of culture and
language we all participate in, and work that explicitly produces knowledge. However, the lack of a common space for immaterial labor makes it difficult for these workers to organize. Our
solution, counter-mapping, is a pragmatic response in that it can
identify the sites (physical, cultural and social) where immaterial
labor takes place and create a common space of encounter, bringing people together to share experiences and analyses, generating
alternative ways of being and acting in the university.

Maps and Militant Research

Counter-mapping springs from arguments in geography that emphasize the situated, productive role of power in mapping and
related geographic knowledge production (Wood, 2010; Crampton, 2010). Emphasizing the productivity of power opens a multiplicity of cartographic power-knowledges and subject positions
outside traditional institutional cartography – examples include
public participatory GIS, art maps, and counter-mapping. Nancy
Peluso coined the term "counter-mapping" to geography journals
to describe mapping indigenous land claims (1995). But others,
such as the Surrealists, the Situationists, Bunge's geographical
expeditions, responses to the plight of migrants to Europe, and
recent conservation efforts all employ forms of counter-mapping
(Wood, 2010; Bunge, 1971; Harris & Hazen, 2005; Holmes, 2003;
Cobarrubias, 2009; Cobarrubias & Pickles, 2008).
Doing counter-mapping means navigating a set of weighty
questions: How do we build conversations and solidarity through
mapping, not authoritative cartographers and maps? What can
be shown and what should remain obscured? How do we avoid
co-optation by capitalist, state or colonialist discourses? 3Cs'
approach to these questions employs practices and theories of
autonomous politics and militant research to engage in counter-mapping from our own situations.
We call this approach autonomous cartography. It builds on
the insights of counter-mapping by using practices of militant
research and ideas of autonomous politics. Pickles calls on mappers to engage in many different kinds of mapping to create new
alternative spaces and worlds, "and, and, and" (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987; Pickles, 2003; Holmes, 2003; Cobarrubias, 2009). 3Cs'
practice intends to create new (political-geographic) possibilities
and other (political-geographic) realities rather than (re)presenting existing geographies, drawing on Deleuze's (1988) critique of
representation and developing our own form of militant research3,
inspired by Precarias a la Deriva and Colectivo Situaciones.
Militant research – research that produces knowledge for
social struggle and is itself a form of political intervention – has
multiple, situated approaches. Our first engagement with the
term comes from the Buenos Aires-based Colectivo Situaciones.
Eschewing objectivity and/or critical distance, their multiple re-

214

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

search initiatives attempt to break down the subject-object divide,
describing the relationship between the researcher and researched
as one of love or friendship. Both parties actively participate in
this relationship and are transformed in the process (Colectivo
Situaciones & MTD de Solano, 2002). Knowledge production affects and modifies the bodies and subjectivities of the participants
and is an essential part of any political practice. Situaciones collaborates with social movements in conducting collective investigations as a form of political struggle, recognizing that "collective
thought generates common practice" (Malo, 2007: 35).

Not only is Colectivo Situaciones' militant research an alternative
to traditional academic research, it is also different from conventional forms of activism. It is a manner of doing politics that takes
nothing for granted and leaves no room for the easy answers of
dogmatic ideologies or party lines. It emphasizes the situatedness
of any political struggle, making universal, pre-known answers
impossible and calling for continual investigation and questioning
(Colectivo Situaciones, 2007).
3Cs' combination of counter-mapping with militant research
renders autonomous cartography quite productive and evocative.

We do not disallow or discount other forms of mapping or militant
research. Instead, we apply the proliferating logic of "and, and, and"
to disseminate and acknowledge multiple new ways of mapping,
producing cartographies explicitly in the grammar of struggle.

disOrientation Guide

Our mapping collaboration blossomed into the best known 3Cs
project to date, disOrientations: (y)our guide to UNC-Chapel
Hill. The disOrientation Guide multiplies understandings of the

Counter-Mapping Militant Research

215

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill to complicate notions
of the university as an aloof ivory tower, detached from the socalled real world. We mapped UNC-Chapel Hill as a multiplicity
of processes with many entrances and exits, thoroughly integrated
with local and global economies of knowledge production.
The visual chaos on first viewing is an intentional attempt to
explode any simple, singular or territorial notion of the university.
A close look reveals a framework, but even that is not discrete. The
margins of each theme conceptually and graphically merge into
others. Three general concepts, corresponding to different theoretical perspectives, organize the front of the guide. The reverse
side serves as a response to re-orient the viewer.
UNC is a factory. Guided by a Marxist analysis, this concept plots
the university within regional and global relations of knowledge
production and labor. Maps show the dense network of higher
education and corporate knowledge production in which UNCCH is located. Corporations at the Research Triangle Park profit
from the results of publically funded and cooperatively produced
knowledge in the university, as well as the labor of university
workers. This regional economic growth regime shapes the university. Students not only learn the course material, but also to be
researchers, programmers, inventors, and entrepreneurs, becoming accustomed to precarious living and working conditions in order to fuel the creative economy (Moten & Harney, 2004).
UNC is a functioning body. Guided by Deleuzian ideas, this
concept highlights how the university is materially embodied.
Knowledge production and immaterial labor cannot be composed
purely of abstraction. The university is composed of people that
eat, sleep, travel, use natural resources, and profoundly affect the
environment they inhabit. The maps in this section investigate the
practices and networks that literally make up the university. Maps
include where faculty and staff sleep (live) and how spaces, such
as tiny pedestrian areas and wide automotive roads, are defined
in and around the university. Different appropriations of space
affect how we envision and occupy the university.
UNC is producing your world. Guided by Foucault's analysis of
the productive interplay of power and knowledge, this portion
maps UNC-CH's role in the production of (geographic) subjects
as global citizens in a particular discourse about the world (Foucault, 1995). Maps show where UNC-CH students study abroad,
where foreign students come from, and what parts of the world
are studied in undergraduate courses. From these maps, we see
that UNC-CH is highly focused on the United States and Europe.
Some places, such as popular study abroad destinations Sevilla and
London, appear large in the university's worldview, while others
do not appear at all.
Reorientations. The reverse side of the disOrientation Guide
further multiplies UNC-CH through a people's history of the
university and a directory of local progressive organizations. A
local economies map draws on Gibson-Graham's writings on local, diverse economies (1996, 2006). From cooperatively owned
and managed bookstores and grocery stores to a really really free
market where items and services are freely shared and exchanged,

216

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

Chapel Hill is already awash with anti / non-capitalist practices.
This side of the disOrientation Guide serves as a useful guide for
newcomers to the area. It also illustrates that many other universities are not only possible, but are already being enacted.
Through these concepts, the disOrientation Guide brings together mapping and militant research in a visual, cartographic
product. Nonetheless, this autonomous cartography is not completely encapsulated on paper: The importance of our work extends beyond the map to the process of making and sharing the
map. Trust among friends created an open atmosphere for collaborative map-making and theoretical heavy-lifting. Not everyone
entered the process with the same background or expertise, yet we
avoided assigning permanent roles. In fact, the uneven distribution of expertise motivated us to socialize that knowledge, teaching each other skills and techniques throughout the process. For
example, the one of us with basic cartographic training did not
do all the graphic design but rather took the opportunity to share
cartographic methods with other members of the collective. Such
a collaborative process is often contentious and difficult to sustain. Positive, flexible attitudes, food (especially pizza) and regular
breaks are imperative to keep the process moving forward.
At each meeting, members shared new map ideas, research,
and cartographic design drafts. Early in this process, we decided
on the general concept of the guide but not on the internal framework. Through our continuing conversations and mapping, our
theoretical analysis and practical understanding of the university began to emerge. The framework of the guide came together
in a single marathon meeting that set up the three-concept front
side. Initially distributed in undergraduate and graduate classes,
the guide prompted interesting discussions about students' labor,
faculty salaries and the university's relations with other social and
economic institutions.
We were surprised to find that the disOrientation Guide also
had value for other activist groups, even those outside Chapel Hill.
The relevance beyond UNC-CH allows for greater conversations
and collaboration through mapping with other groups. These are
processes of sharing and creating knowledge, forming relationships and producing new subjectivities. We continue to distribute
disOrientation Guides for free through student and activist networks and our website.

disOrientations2

While distributing the first guide, 3Cs continued to conduct research and map knowledge production. Out of this work, we produced other graphic products, including a comic book about UNCCH's drive to build a research campus, a zine about budget cuts
and, in 2009, a second disOrientation Guide (see article page 26).4
disOrientations2 focuses on UNC-CH within the mutually related
crises of the university and the economy, delving more deeply into
the ways precarity, migration and global resistance struggles were
playing out on university campuses at the time.
Much like the first disOrientation Guide, the idea of disOrientations2 is to explode the notion that our university and others
have a simple, singular problem, a budget shortfall. disOrientations2 includes maps and graphics of the game of university rankings, the role of migrants in knowledge production, the precarious

labor conditions of many university employees and struggles for
alternative higher education around the world. Following the first
guide, disOrientations2 plots multiple processes and existing equitable alternatives to current university struggles. Compared to
the first guide, it has a stronger focus on subjectivity and how we
were individually and collectively navigating the crevasses of the
university in crisis.
With several international participants in the collective, an important analytical element in disOrientations2 is the question of
mapping how UNC-CH is part of the broader border regime. We
map how the university functions as a border with a flow-chart of
rules, restrictions and regulations related to student visas, as well
as with a map of student migration flows. We also map how the
university produces precarity, documenting the uneven implementation of austerity measures. We map the effects of rankings
and competition, as well as a global wave of protest at university
campuses that inspired our efforts. The second disOrientations
Guide is also an explicit attempt to generate new networks and
alliances with struggles in different places as part of our political
project. Some of the data for the guide was even crowd-sourced
via those same networks.

Counter/Mapping QMary

As our maps and practices of counter-mapping and militant research traveled, a few of us also traveled to London to participate
in a project counter-mapping Queen Mary University.5 A set of
international students with different theoretical backgrounds,
personal experiences, skill sets and familiarity with mapping, coalesced around this project. The resulting map served as a direct
intervention in a specific political moment, bringing together the
issues of migration and student struggles, both important political
issues at the time, but lacking dialogue between activists dedicated
to each issue.
The front side maps the flows of international students into the
UK, depicting the political economy of migration as well as the hierarchical relationships created in a university increasingly defined
by rankings and the "research excellence framework." Filters depict the borders, showing that the border lets some people in while
keeping others out, transforming everyone in the process. The map
also shows sites of resistance, giving symbolic visibility to the burgeoning student movement. The other side attempts to delve deeper into the subjective aspects of migration through a board game
that allows players to experience the journey of students from different origins studying in London. The game was designed after
interviews and conversations with international students, inside
the collective and out, allowing us to incorporate their experiences
– both their suffering and constant forms of resistance – into the
game and creating stronger relationships between those students
in the process.
Making the map, each participant contributed according
to their skills: drawing icons or sea monsters, using mapping or
design software, researching migration laws and data, building
a theoretical framework. Yet we also learned from one another,
taking care to socialize those skills and know-hows. As part of the
research process, we organized a public seminar called "What is
the university?" and a mapping workshop as well as a collective re-

Counter-Mapping Militant Research

217

search drift through campus. These events and actions helped us
to expand the mapping process beyond the collective to include
the larger university and activist communities.

Conclusions

Our experiences with autonomous cartography illustrate how
mapping can function as a form of militant research, producing
novel knowledges and subjectivities while also investigating and
instigating political change. For 3Cs, this means not only producing empowering maps but also creating alternative forms of social
organization within and beyond the collective. These experiences highlight the importance of collaboration and trust as well as
careful consideration of the social context and ethics of mapping.
This work is premised on the idea that geographic knowledge and
spatial creativity are produced by movements and people affected
by different forms of dispossession and ready for dissent.
Around the world, spaces of resistance and autonomous knowledge production are emerging as the rhetoric of crisis and budget cuts are being used to further privatize universities and enclose knowledge. In this context, 3Cs is changing: We are now
geographically diffuse, positioned in different sites of the social
factory and on different schedules. This forces us to rethink the
locally-situated nature of our research and insist on devising horizontal methods of collaboration across space, availability and different precarious arrangements. In new situations and challenges,
3Cs continues to explore the political possibilities of and, and,
and…

218

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

Endnotes
1. An earlier version of this text appeared as Dalton, Craig and Liz
Mason-Deese. 2012. Counter (Mapping) Actions: Mapping as Militant
Research. ACME: An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies
11(3): 439-66.
2. “Precarious literally means unsure, uncertain, difficult, delicate. As a
political term it refers to living and working conditions without any guarantees. Precarious work refers to all possible forms of non-guaranteed
labor arrangements and flexible exploitation: from illegalised, seasonal
and temporary employment to homework, flex- and temp-work, to
subcontractors, freelancers or so called self-employed persons” (Frassanito Network 2005).
3. Current militant research practices can be traced back to the Italian practice of conricerca (co-research), in which academics and activists collaborated with workers to research the material and subjective conditions
of new forms of labor (Negri, 2003). Conricerca “developed as communication and cooperation, as a process of resubjectification and counterformation, and as a forum for the autonomous political representation of
the ‘organized spontaneity’ of the workers” (Borio et al., 2007: 168). These
practices challenged the division between academic research and political
action in the hopes of cooperatively producing new knowledges.
4. The comic book and zine, as well as other 3Cs’ documents are freely
available at: countercartographies.org/downloads
5. For more on the project, see: countermappingqmary.blogspot.com/ and
lateral.culturalstudiesassociation.org/issue1/content/countermapping.html
Further Reading
Casas-Cortés, M. & Cobarrubias, S. 2007. Drifting Through the Knowledge
Machine. Shukaitis, S. & Graeber, D., eds. Constituent Imagination: Militant
Investigations // Collective Theorization. Oakland: AK Press: 112-126. countercartographies.org/download/drifting_through_the_knowledge_machine.pdf, 14 January 2018.
Counter-Cartographies Collective 2009. Practices of Radical Cartography. In
The Edu-factory Collective, ed. Toward a Global Autonomous University.
New York: Autonomedia: 110-113.
Counter Cartographies Collective, Dalton, C. & Mason-Deese, L. 2012.
Counter (Mapping) Actions: Mapping as Militant Research. ACME: An
International Journal for Critical Geographies, 11(3): 439-466.
Stallmann, T. 2012. Alternative Cartographies Building Collective Power. PhD
Thesis. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. countercartographies.org/download/stallmann-ma_thesis.pdf, 14 January 2018.

References
Borio, G., Pozzi, F. & Roggero, G. 2007. Conricerca as Political Action. In Coté,
M., Day, R. & Peuter, G., eds. Utopian Pedagogy: Radical Experiments
Against Neoliberal Globalization. Toronto: University of Toronto Press:
163-185.
Bousquet, M. 2008. How the University Works: Higher Education and the LowWage Nation. New York: New York University Press.
Bunge, W. 1971. Fitzgerald: Geography of a Revolution. Morristown, NJ: General
Learning Press.
jstor.org/stable/j.ctt46nbwg, 14 January 2018.
Cobarrubias, S. 2009. Mapping Machines: Activist Cartographies of the Border
and Labor Lands of Europe. The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. countercartographies.org/download/cobarrubiasdiss.pdf, 14 January
2018.
Cobarrubias, S. & Pickles, J. 2008. Spacing Movements: The Turn to Cartographies and Mapping Practices in Contemporary Social Movements. The
Spatial Turn. Interdisciplinary Perspectives. New York: Routledge: 36-58.
Colectivo Situaciones 2007. Something More on Research Militancy: Footnotes on Procedures and (in) Decisions. In Shukaitis, S. & Graeber, D.,
eds. Constituent Imagination: Militant Investigations //Collective Theorization.
Oakland: AK Press: 73-93.
Colectivo Situaciones & de Solano, M.T.D. 2002. La Hipótesis 891. Más Allá de
los Piquetes. First edition. Buenos Aires: Ediciones de Mano en Manoo.
Crampton, J.W. 2010. Mapping: A Critical Introduction to Cartography and GIS.
First edition. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Deleuze, G. 1988. Foucault. First edition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Deleuze, G. & Guattari, F. 1987. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis, MN: The University of Minnesota Press.
Edu Factory Collective 2008. Universita Globale: il Nuovo Mercato del Sapere.
Rome: Manifestolibri.
Foucault, M. 1995. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Second Vintage
Books edition. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Frassanito Network 2005. Precarious, Precarisation, Precariat? Mute, 2(0):
60-62.

Gibson-Graham, J.K. 2006. A Postcapitalist Politics. Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.
Gibson-Graham, J.K. 1996. The End of Capitalism (as We Knew It): A Feminist
Critique of Political Economy. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Hardt, M. & Negri, A. 2000. Empire. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Harris, L.M. & Hazen, H.D. 2005. Power of Maps: (Counter) Mapping for
Conservation. ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies, 4(1):
99-130.
Holmes, B. 2003. Imaginary Maps, Global Solidarities. Piet Zwart Institute.
automatist.org/photo/Pictures/pzi%202002-2006/2003-04-brian_
holmes/Piet%20Zwart%20Institute%20-%20Imaginary%20Maps,%20
Global%20Solidarities.html, 1 July 2018.
Holmes, B. 2007. Disconnecting the Dots of the Research Triangle: Corporatisation, Flexibilisation and Militarisation in the Creative Industries.
brianholmes.wordpress.com/2007/02/26/disconnecting-the-dots-of-the-research-triangle, 14 January 2018.
Lazzarato, M. 1996. Immaterial Labor. In Virno, P. & Hardt, M., eds. Radical
Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics: 133-47.
Malo, M. 2007. Nociones Comunes. Experiencias y Ensayos entre Investigación y
Militancia. Madrid: Traficantes de Sueños.
Moten, F. & Harney, S. 2004. The University and the Undercommons: Seven
Theses. Social Text, 22(2): 101-115.
Peluso, N.L. 1995. Whose Woods Are These? Counter-Mapping Forest Territories in Kalimantan, Indonesia. Antipode, 27(4): 383-406.
Pickles, J. 2003. A History of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Mapping, and the
Geo-Coded World. London ; New York: Routledge.
Precarias a la Derive 2006. A Very Careful Strike: Four Hypotheses. The
Commoner, 11: 33-45.

Counter-Mapping Militant Research

219

220

221

Mapping the Squatting Movement
Pappsatt-Kollektiv – Tobias Morawski
berlin-besetzt.de

222

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

In the beginning of the 1980s the squatting movement was an important topic within the local politics of Berlin. This movement
was triggered by increased housing shortage while entire streets
of apartments were being evicted, ultimately leading to their decay. The fall of the Berlin Wall in the beginning of the 1990s was
followed by a second squatting wave which led to the formation
of many self-governed cultural spaces in Berlin. Even today there
are hundreds of residential and cultural spaces in the city which
emanated from former squats.
While different urban protest movements were regaining
strength, 2012 marked the increase of many house and place
squattings. For example, in June of 2012 retirees squatted their
meeting point in the district of Wedding in order to ensure that
it would survive. Residents from around the subway station Kottbusser Tor built a "Gecekondu", a hut as a location to meet and
protest against rising rents and displacement. The hut is still there
and in use today. At the end of 2012 refugees organized a protest
camp at Oranienplatz to fight against their bad living conditions.
They also squatted a former school building in Kreuzberg during
the so-called "Refugee Strike" in December of 2012. These current
examples show that squattings have had and continue to have a
significant meaning for social battles in Berlin. The project Berlin besetzt (English: Berlin squatted) wanted to depict the Berlin
squatting history in form of an interactive city map. Since the central topic of the house squatting movement is the appropriation of
urban space, its history must be presented spatially.
Berlin Besetzt is an interactive online street map combined with
a digital archive about the history of house and place squatting in
Berlin. The project tells the story of house squattings in Berlin as
an example of the self-empowered interventions of protest movements in urban space and urban life. The map explains the motivations for squatting, revealing some of them and also showing
what has become of the created places today. The map wants to
visualize collective and self-governed spaces, meaning the representation of resisting actors and spaces within the struggle for the
right to the city in order to show that political fights/ movements
can be successful. The map is intended to be a contribution to the
political debate and to show the urban space of Berlin as a result
of fights for appropriation of space. The starting point for this description is today's Berlin – the visible result of the movement.

The Formation Process
Visualizing the Movements Archive

Since the topic "house squattings in Berlin" has so far been covered only by few scientific publications in its entirety, the used
data are based primarily on in-scene publications, newspaper
articles and our own research. Some documents are fragmentary
and contradictory at times. In many cases "scientific" verification
is hardly possible. Several years of research were initiated to close
the knowledge gaps in urban and movement history.
The Papiertiger archive and the Kollektivbibliothek Bethanien,
both archives of social movements in Berlin, provided us with ample original documents on house squatting in Berlin. We collected
data on locations and times of the squattings, the history of the

single houses and the events of the history of the movement from
sources such as flyers, journals and journal articles (of which we
were able to digitalize a large amount). We were also able to convince Umbruch Bildarchiv to contribute their comprehensive photo collection to the project. A timeline of events was taken from
the book Autonome in Bewegung (Grauwacke, 2008) and edited. In
addition, we interviewed activists, some of whom were from different eras andsome of whom had participated in the squatting,
during which we had painstakingly created growing Excel tables.
The collected data were entered into a database which was then
connected to an Open-Street-Map. This map is visually accessible
online at berlin-besetzt.de. The Excel tables containing the raw data
are also updated regularly and can be downloaded from the website
(see section "About" for a link). The map's display method enables
a fast overview of hundreds of project spaces as well as an intuitive
navigation through a comprehensive archive of thousands of datasets and documents on squatting actions. The project is supposed to
be self-explanatory, thus being accessible for people without prior
knowledge. At the same time it should supply detailed knowledge for
experts and scientists. We decided to use a factual and universally
accepted picture language that addresses not only subcultural scenes.
The online map is primarily intended for the use with the computer
at home. Nevertheless, it can also be used for exhibitions and individual city explorations with the use of the smartphone.
Reactions to the Publication
The website's publication created an enormous echo. The press
and the social networks circulated the news of the publication like
a political sensation. We received a lot of e-mails in which (former) activists and members of initiatives and housing projects
expressed their gratitude, congratulated us or sent us corrections.
By now the project has repeatedly been cited as a source on different occasions focusing on the topic of squatting. Even the German Historical Museum has exhibited the website temporarily as
a computer terminal. On the one hand, this shows the importance
of conducting your own historical work, instead of leaving it to
mainstream media and science institutions. On the other hand, it
shows the power of easily understandable visualizations.
Interesting is that we often received feedback from mostly older activists, telling us that the re-writing of the squatting history
was unnecessary and useless since the movement already failed
and is over. However, the reactions to the publication showed the
opposite to be the case. The boulevard newspaper Berliner Kurier,
for example, contributed a whole double page spread to the coverage under the headline "The squatters' second summer – They are
still there even though the spook should be over by now" (Fleischmann, 2014). The part that focuses on "the squatters' second
summer" cannot mean the revival of house squattings: Prior to the
publication of the map, there were hardly any successful squattings in the past 20 years. Moreover, it must be the publication of
the map that was perceived as an uprising of the movement since
it again visualized the struggles for a right to the city.
The Lessons of International Dissemination
In collaboration with the SqEK (Squatting in Europe Collectives),
a network made up of activists and researchers on the topic of

Mapping the Squatting Movement

223

house squattings, there was the opportunity to publish an international version of the map. The data for this map had been collected
by SqEK members within the context of the MOVOKEUR project. The latter was a collective research project on house squattings
in Europe. However, the realization of this project confronted us
with some problems we have outlined as follows:
• The work in a large group structure meant enormous additional effort. For example, the collective communication via
e-mail is a tough process if it covers many countries with
different languages.
• If and how the maps will be further updated depends on the
individuals' willingness to engage in hard voluntary work or to
find alternative possibilities of financing. The running costs for
things like web servers and programming can also be an obstacle.
• A common website/map seems to provide an objective comparability of the displayed information. Yet in reality only a
few cities were incorporated into the work. The research for
every city was conducted by different groups or single individuals. Depending on the availability of information sources,
prior knowledge or individual work speed, some data sets are
mostly complete while others are far from being complete.
• There are also differences in the evaluation of what is important for the history of certain movements. The Barcelona
map, for example, only shows social centers since residential
squattings occur too often to depict all of them. Similar to
Madrid, they mostly exist informally in to order avoid discovery and subsequent eviction. In Italy people even protested
against the publication of the map, since the available information could lead to attacks by Neo-Nazis and the police.
This leads to the final question if it wouldn't be more sensible to
always produce independent maps, that live up to the standards of

224

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

differences between movement history, the data research as well
as the intention of producing the map in the first place. It would be
nice to find a creative solution in order to show similarities and relations of the movements to each other. We all can definitely learn
a lot from their histories.
References
Fleischmann, M. 2014. Die Szene Lebt: Der Zweite Sommer der Hausbesetzer. Berliner Kurier. berliner-kurier.de/berlin/kiez---stadt/die-szene-lebtder-zweite-sommer-der-hausbesetzer-1030090, 13 June 2017.
Grauwacke, A.G. 2008. Autonome in Bewegung: aus den Ersten 23 Jahren.
Berlin: Assoziation A.
Links
maps.squat.net
sqek.squat.net
movokeur.wordpress.com
Illustrations
Map by Pappsatt Collective / reclaimyourcity.net in collaboration with Papiertiger archive, Umbruch image archive, Kollektivbibliothek Bethanien, Eike Send etc.
Photograph previous page left by Michael Kipp / Umbruch Bildarchiv: Eviction
at Fränkelufer in Kreuzberg on 24 March 1981.
Photograph this page by Manfred Kraft / Umbruch Bildarchiv: Skalitzer Straße
in Kreuzberg between Kottbusser Tor and Görlitzer Bahnhof, beginning of the
1980s.
Photograph opposite page top by Oliver Feldhaus / Umbruch Bildarchiv: In
September 2014, refugees occupied a roof top on Guertelstraße in order to
protest against inhumane and illegal asylum politics by the Berlin Senate, and
to demand basic services.
Photograph opposite page bottom by Nico Baumgarten: The empty lot on Cuvry Straße was home to a diverse group of people until their eviction in 2014.

Mapping the Squatting Movement

225

Content of the map
With the help of a time axis, the developments and spatial dispersion of
house squattings become interactively comprehensible.

lin city politics. Also they shed light on the reasons of conflict as well as the
impact on the social and cultural life in the city and the different districts.

Annual overviews, a chronic, texts on the history and the imagination of
different squatting maps (house squattings, corrals, place squattings) explain
the context of the history of the places the movement created and the Ber-

Detailed information on the individual places and connected archival material,
such as self-descriptions and publications (posters, flyers, journals, brochures)
explain the intention of the squatting and the use of the opened spaces.

Emancipatory Mapmaking: Lessons from Kibera
Erica Hagen, Julian Stenmanns, Till Straube
mapkibera.org

228

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

Modern mapmaking in the global South has been deeply entwined
with the colonial endeavor of producing legible spaces. Critical
Geography has emphasized the role of maps in governing populations and their politics of in/visibility, especially concerning marginalized communities. What else can maps do? How can communities and activists deploy mapping technologies as tools that
support marginalized communities by promoting recognition,
political participation and access to basic services?
Julian Stenmanns (JS) and Till Straube (TS) spoke with Erica Hagen (EH), co-founder of Map Kibera, a community-based open
source mapping project in the neighborhood of Kibera in Nairobi,
Kenya, about her experiences with participatory mapping and the
politics of in/visibility.
JS: What were some of the motivations behind Map Kibera?
EH: Map Kibera started in 2009. The concept came up at a mapping conference in Nairobi. A group of geographers and others
were traveling to Nairobi to talk about mapping, and being in
Nairobi, you can't help but notice that Kibera is a really prominent and visible place. It is central to the city and a very large slum
area. However, the participants of the conference, who were also
interested in open source geography, noticed that Kibera wasn't
mapped at all. Moreover, as we looked for the official registers,
we discovered that authorities labeled and designated the area as
a forest. Therefore, we wanted to change this, not from the viewpoint of an international NGO, but rather mapping it from the
perspective of the residents.
TS: How did you go about starting the project?
EH: We began by teaming up with a local community service
organization that was willing to host us and introduce us to the
community. That was key because we couldn't just walk around
by ourselves. Simply showing up would be very hard. You would
get lost within five minutes if you aren't from the area. In addition,
you could end up in a precarious situation, not necessarily dangerous, but there is bit of resistance to outsiders just wandering
around. Furthermore, mapping from the outside was no option
for us. Besides, when you look at satellite imagery of the area, there
is not much that you can see in terms of details of the features,
which is also due to the density.
JS: Can you tell us about the work processes that went into making the
actual map? What would your typical day look like?
EH: First we recruited some young adults between 18 and 25 years
old who lived in the area. They were familiar with the neighborhood
and involved in the community. Seven years ago, smart phones and
computers were not widely distributed in Kibera. Therefore, they
first had to familiarize themselves with the GPS devices. We had
at least one person from each of Kibera's thirteen villages, and we
told them to map what they felt was important to be visible in their
village. This was the beginning of a waypoint collection, just by
pushing the button of the GPS device and writing down whatever
the place was. We didn't really give them any more instructions. So

it was up to them what they were going to mark. That way we made
sure to keep the map as locally informed as possible.
TS: In retrospect, are there some things that would have been useful to
know when starting out? What were the steep parts of the learning curve?
EH: The challenges that we hadn't expected were more of a social
than of a technological nature. We weren't really able to pay people. However, we realized that they spent all day with pretty tiring
work and they were expecting to have at least some kind of compensation. So we arranged for a little stipend. Moreover, later on
it became more of a challenge of how to make it all part of the big
picture: How do we make this information as relevant as possible
for the community?
JS: Speaking of the community, what kind of maps – mental or otherwise – existed prior to Map Kibera?
EH: Yes, there were a couple of different ones. The spatial comprehension in the communities was pretty interesting. The main
navigation method is based on landmarks. Therefore, we wanted
to make sure that we got the major landmarks on the map. We
didn't expect people to use the map to go to the grocery store in the
community. Rather, we started with printing out sectoral maps.
For example, we put all health-related places together in one map
and shared it with the community. This way the bigger picture of
health in Kibera became visible and could also be used when facing government officials.
TS: The technology of cartography comes with some historical baggage. What did it mean for you to engage in mapmaking in a postcolonial context?
EH: If we dealt with these issues it was on a very local, concrete
level. Although many aspects of life in Kibera are actually pretty
formalized, it remains an informal settlement without official approval, and inhabitants are very aware of this issue. Government
maps designate the site of Kibera as a forest area. In many ways,
becoming visible on the map was a matter of pride for the people
we worked with.
JS: What does it mean to put Kibera on the map in a political sense?
What are the concrete political achievements and the achievements of
putting Kibera on the map?
EH: Over the past few years, we've been working with local
schools. In Kibera, there are around 300 schools, many of them
organized by non-state providers. So none of the people who are
providers of those schools or who teach there seemed to be represented in this way. The map legitimizes their work. A local government officer of education started copying the maps and distributing them to help show others the education landscape of Kibera.
In the individual schools, the maps and all the information they
contain become somewhat part of the curriculum. It also became
widely known that government schools covered only few of the
students, which became a point the Kibera Minister of Parliament
used to try to draw more resources.

Emancipatory Mapmaking: Lessons from Kibera

229

TS: Your map grants visibility on a global scale. What are the consequences of putting local knowledge into the public domain?
EH: Yes, there definitely has been a lot of visibility through the
map. Without the map, nobody would have paid much attention
to that specific little dot on the map. So how did we deal with this
visibility? I guess the main way was to ask ourselves if the mapping process and its product would put people at risk. Because
Kibera and other places like it are contested and vulnerable locations, especially given the fact that there is a lot of activity that is
not formalized. Most slums get their electricity through informal
connections to the grid. But we wanted to emphasize the aspect
of protection through visibility. Becoming more visible can also
lead to more protection because things that happen can be known
– even globally – and that provides people with a sense of security. Whoever tries to do a crack down on informal housing will
become very visible. Finally, people in Kibera have a strong sense
of community and they will say: This thing we don't want to be
known, so we don't want to put it on the map. So that's the guideline we followed. We just followed the people's lead – and they
tend to imagine a lot more visibility than what is actually there.
JS: How did the nature of OpenStreetMap as your main platform inform the goals of the project or its emancipatory potential? Would this
have been possible with a paper map?
EH: Map Kibera as a paper map as in offline only? No, that would
definitely not have been possible since we really intended to connect to wider audience. This thing is more than a data tool; it is
a communication and broadcasting tool, so by definition this
requires the internet and information technology. This way the
community can update its map so it is truly an open, participatory
map of and by the community. We did, however, distribute printed maps as well, and this has been a key to making sure the information reaches more local people. The schools maps were given to
each school on paper. So it is important to consider the best ways
to access people as well as allow them to take part in digital open
mapping.
TS: Thank you for the interview.
EH: Thank you.

230

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

Conclusion

After speaking with Erica Hagen, we revisited the different representations of Kibera on GoogleMaps and OpenStreetMap. When
comparing the two maps side by side, the difference is indeed
striking: while the visualization on Google's platform in no way
suggests a dense and vibrant neighborhood, Map Kibera's data on
Open Street Map lends itself to be read as a bottom-up mapping
of locations that matter to the community. Since its start in 2009,
Map Kibera has thus been facilitating an alternative cartographic
articulation of Kibera, available to both its residents and to people
remotely accessing online maps of the area.
Finally, while we agree with Erica Hagen's elaborations on the merits of the Map Kibera project and community mapping in general,
we also want to draw attention to the ambiguities that inherently
accompany undertakings of mapping marginalized communities.
Cartography is deeply rooted in a specific way of seeing. Google's
Beyond the Map project employs drones and cameras mounted on
motor scooters to explore Rio de Janeiro's favelas, an "uncharted
and mysterious spot on the map […]" (Google 2017). Not only is
this language revealing when it comes to who sees and who is seen,
but Google is actively pushing the frontier of what is visible, accessible and governable into terrains previously indiscernible for
capital and the state (Luque-Ayala & Neves Maia 2018). This aspect is certainly reminiscent of the colonial project of rendering
populations and spaces legible through cartography. It is therefore
a key challenge for community mapping projects to be aware of
the complex politics of in/visibility and to discern ways to realize
their emancipatory potential within this field of tension.
References
Google 2017. Google Presents Beyond the Map.
beyondthemap.withgoogle.com, 19 May 2017.
Luque-Ayala, A. & Neves Maia, F. 2018. Digital territories: Google maps as a
political technique in the re-making of urban informality. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space, 0: 1–19.
Illustrations
Map on following spread: Kibera and surrounding areas as they appear on
OpenStreetMap. © OpenStreetMap contributors.
Photograph on previous spread by Map Kibera Trust: Lucy Fondo of Map
Kibera assists a teacher in Kibera in finding their school on the map.
Photograph on opposite page top by Map Kibera Trust: Douglas Namale
maps a school in Kibera for Map Kibera’s Open Schools Kenya project.
Photograph on opposite page bottom by Map Kibera Trust: A wall in Kibera
is painted with the security map created by Map Kibera.

Emancipatory Mapmaking: Lessons from Kibera

231

232

233

Mapping Postkolonial

An Archive of Post/Colonial Traces, Layers and Spectres in Munich

Eva Bahl, Simon Goeke, Zara Pfeiffer, Peter Spillmann, Michael Vögeli, Philip Zölls
mapping.postkolonial.net

234

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

mapping.postkolonial.net

The map is a cooperation of [muc] münchen postkolonial, Zurich-based Art Project Labor k3000 and the Munich-based Ecumenical Office for Peace and Justice e.V.. The project was funded by the Foundation Remembrance, Responsibility and Future
(Stiftung EVZ).
We are a team of researchers, activists, artists and programmers/software engineers. Our academic backgrounds are somewhere between the arts, sociology, anthropology, political science
and history. Some of us have worked on critical mapping before;
some of us are part of the group [muc] münchen postkolonial that
has done activist research on post/colonial traces in Munich and
has been involved in different decolonizing projects and actions
since 2006. Many of these experiences and much of this knowledge have found their way into our postcolonial map of Munich.

see the city. mapping.postkolonial.net presents a snapshot of this
investigation, which does not seek to present Munich as having
had a special role in colonialism. The aim is rather to expose the
seemingly commonplace banalities of colonialist world views and
post-colonial conditions for contemplation and debate – in their
full diffusion and impact. Exposing and reflecting on these is both
a precondition for, and a part of, the process of decolonialization.
The project maps post/colonial vestiges in Munich. Some of these
are still visible in the city, some require an intent view, many stay
invisible: the statue of a colonial sculptor, the fading marks of a
colonial memorial plaque on a cemetery wall, a renamed street, a
non-existent grave. The obvious and hidden vestiges in the city
function as a vision panel to get a closer look and question the
present and past of post/colonial relations.

Decolonizing Munich

How to Use It

Unlike cities such as Hamburg – with its access to the sea – and
Berlin – as the capital of imperial Germany – Munich was not a
hub of colonial activity. Nevertheless, colonialism is also deeply
ingrained in Munich's civic society, having shaped it on a sustained basis through the ages. The numerous remnants and traces
of colonialism that can be found to this day inside Munich testify
to the history and continuing presence of post/colonial realities.
At the same time there are a number of traces and places whose
colonial associations are no longer, or only very obliquely, evident
today. Despite being unseen and unspoken, these frequently tell
us more about our present dealings with the colonial past than the
supposedly obvious ones. Tracing their history, inquiring into the
historical contexts of their rises and declines, and articulating the
frequently unspoken forces they represent will change the way we

There are three different approaches to use the website mapping.
postkolonial.net.
Mapping
The interactive map of Munich shows numerous traces of the
city's colonial past. By clicking on some of the crosses, the history
of the traces, narratives and theoretical layers are revealed.
Trip for Traces
If you like to do your own reasearch in the city, there are several
thematic tours recommended. A version for mobile devices navigates you through the tours. For further information visit the website mapping.postkolonial.net/m.
Archive
All traces, narratives and theoretical layers are listed in the archive.
There you will also find additional material, sources and the exact
location marked on a city map.

Mapping Postkolonial

235

Search for Traces
Traces of the colonial past can be found all over the city. Traces
can for instance be places, sculptures, tombs, commemorative
plaques, museum exhibits and street names. They are linked with
events, protagonists of the colonial history.
The Von-Trotha Street was renamed as Herero Street in the
year 2007. The new street name commemorates the anti-colonial
resistance of the Herero people against the authorities in the German colony South-West Africa. The street is also dedicated to the
victims of the genocide (1904-1908) that followed the resistance
activities. General Lothar von Trotha – the former name patron
of the street – had commanded the annihilation campaign of the
German "Protection Force". There are still about 30 streets in Munich that are named with a clear positive reference to colonial actors, places and events. The Munich Foreigners' Advisory Council and other groups have repeatedly demanded the renaming of
these colonial streets.

236

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

Narratives
The Narratives are telling the common story of different vestiges
of Munich's colonial history. Referring to historical events, the
narratives relate the impact and agency of the protagonists of colonial history.
A plaque was installed at the New Town Hall in 1913 to commemorate German soldiers who had been killed in the colonies.
During renovations in the 1960s the plaque was damaged and
taken down. A new commemorative plaque was installed at the
Old Southern Cemetery. After having been paint-bombed and
sprayed repeatedly, it was first fixed at a higher level and then removed. After another restoration the plaque was re-installed at a
more visible and controllable place outside the cemetery (see photographs on previous spread).

Spectres of Colonialism
Colonialism is dead yet it still lives on. As a shadow of the colonial past, it continues to haunt people and societies, even though
this is barely noticeable at times: in colonial furniture, in the
colonial style featured by delicatessens and restaurants, revived
in commercials, films and documentaries, and in clinging to
colonial monuments, street names and racist appellations and
epithets. Time and again attempts to exorcize these specters in
disputes about street names or racist terms in children's books
demonstrate how flexible, protean and yet persistent they are.
Colonialism is dead and yet it still spreads calamity.
At a shooting gallery at the Munich Oktoberfest in the year
2014, visitors could shoot at two targets that were racist representations of black people. As an answer to critical reactions the municipal administration installed an information board, that claimed
that the men pictured as targets in the shooting gallery were wearing "typical German clothes with a top hat, respectively a spike
helmet". This – the information board explained – should be read
as a reference to the German colonies in Africa. Overlooking that
colonialism was a genuinely racist project, it went on: "The targets
thereby neither have a racist background nor a racist motif. They're
to be interpreted exclusively in the historic colonial context."

Layers
The Layers offer different approaches to theoretical discourses
about colonialism and racism.
Colonialism was not a unique event, not a clearly defined era,
not a geographically limited phenomenon. Colonialism was and is
a global system of domination by a power that culminates in the
subjection and exploitation of others. It is a phenomenon deeply
ingrained in both the colonizing and colonized societies – in social, political and economic relations, in laws, decrees and administrative processes, in architecture and monuments, in our mindsets and our actions. This colonialization renews itself constantly
so that it has survived until today. At the same time, it is being superseded and subverted by decolonizing processes and practices.
Decolonizing means uncovering the remnants and traces of colonialism in minds and societies. Decolonizing means liberating and
reconceptualizing, i.e. actively discarding the colonial and racist
world views, modes of thinking, practices and privileges that we
have adopted both consciously and unconsciously. Decolonization is therefore at once a process and the goal of that process.

Mapping Postkolonial

237

Open-Source Aerial Imagery as a Critique Tool
The Extractive Geopolitics Project

Imaginando Buenas

Controlled burn / 2003-2013 / Guayaramerín, Brazil

10°51’21”S, 65°30’39”W

2003

240

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

2013

Imaginando Buenas is a multi-disciplinary collective founded in
2008 and based in Montevideo. It is interested in and working
with a wide range of topics from politics to design, objects to territories, music and visuals, friendship and love.
The origin of this project can be traced back to our fascination
with satellite imagery, mixed with both the intrigue and indignation caused by the brutal exploitation of the face of the earth. It is
too often that we are told about the impact of extractive industries
and how they affect natural resources, but we rarely know its scale
or location or even notice the context in which they are placed.
Discussing this issue we realized that the massive transformations
we knew were happening on our planet could be searched for and
found in an almost playful way: The use of open data aerial imagery and the possibility to navigate the earth is now accessible to
everybody.
With all this in mind, we started the hunt for globally dispersed
alterations of the earth. We looked for projects that had shaped
the biosphere radically in a short time span – mining industries,
energy-harvesting projects or even large crops – through multiple
sources – newspapers and blogs to mining conglomerate portals
– which lead us to the most diverse spots on the planet. Our final goal was to list these projects, choose among the various ones
we found, and finally merge the information on screen into largescale printable images forming a canvas that was otherwise impossible to see.

The result is dramatic: It exposes the brutality of human environmental impact. Among the sites there is a center pivot irrigation
system in Australia, a controlled forest wildfire in Brazil, a coal
mine in Mozambique, a hydroelectric dam in Iran-Azerbaijan
and a lignite surface mine in Germany. It was our intent to show a
territorial diversity that could emphasize the phenomena as global and not being relegated to resource extractions in developing
countries or advanced northern industries.
These canvases were first exhibited at the Facultad de Arquitectura de la Universidad de la República and later in a collective exhibition called Perfiles Políticos (Political Profiles) at the Centro de
Exposiciones Subte in Montevideo.
It is quite interesting how popular and accessible this tool has become in recent years and, with it, the capacity to raise consciousness and awareness: What could be done in secrecy or out of reach
in the past can now be put in the center of the public eye. In this
sense, there is a huge potential for both investigation and critical
analysis that could empower citizens to mobilize and take action
on what is ultimately the future of a collective and global resource:
our planet.
Illustrations
all images of this article: © Google, DigitalGlobe.

The final products are 5 diptychs, one for each of the megaprojects
chosen, consisting of two 85 cm by 85 cm high-resolution images,
taken directly from publically available satellite imagery (Google Earth) and processed with a computer-aided design software
plugin called PlexEarth. These images of approximately 20,000
by 20,000 pixels had the exact same point of view but with an average difference of seven years in time in order to show the transformations on site by comparison.

Open-Source Aerial Imagery as a Critique Tool

241

Center pivot irrigation, Karijini National Park, Australia

22°33’26”S, 117°59’25”E

2010

Lignite surface mine, Grevenbroich, Germany

2014

51°02’37”N, 6°32’10”E

2000

2014

Hydroelectric dam, Iran-Azerbaiyan

39°05’28”N, 45°24’08”E

2007

Coal mine, Benga, Mozambique

2009

16°10’17”S, 33°40’25”E

2010

2014

You Must Buy before You Can Fly
The Airport Malls

Philippe Rekacewicz
visionscarto.net

244

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

The following maps are the result of a long-term observation process that I made in many airports mainly in Europe. At the same
time they represent a symbol.
The Observation Process
The maps show how the general public, and specifically the passengers, are moving in a space carefully designed by an "invisible"
force. By this I mean people in power and in charge to organize the
logistics and flux of things, planes, cars and people inside public
buildings. The general public usually knows little about it unless it
would implement a long-term research project with observations
on these spaces in order to evaluate the changes. The collection of
maps (that could well be an animated map) are meant to visualize
an invisible process: Bit by bit the passengers' free will and freedom
of movement is taken away in order to make them more willing to
spend money for goods, such as expensive food and drinks (for the
anecdote: In many airports, after the security check, you can find
anything – millions of bottles of vodka or cigarettes – but not the
shadow of a diaper if by bad luck you forgot them at home and you
travel with two small kids). The maps also show the progressive reduction of the "possible public space" for the public. This space will
finally force the public to move into a fully organized commercial
environment. Eventually, I want to propose a methodology of observation of spaces and territories to be used by people, the public,
passengers, users, in order to "reclaim the streets" and, in this case,
to reclaim the fair use of their public spaces.
This requires a pretty strict and disciplined approach, which can
be considered in two phases.
The first phase is purely a research initiative. Observing and monitoring a location and its evolution is a multi-parametric analysis that
needs to envisage both time (vertical vision) and space (horizontal
vision). A location changes with time, at a more or less fast speed,
and gets organized differently according to the "need" we suppose
the "sponsors" have identified as necessary. This means that the observation process is to be considered an initiative of deconstruction:
It is all about evaluating the changes along the observed period and
detecting the hidden intentions that lie behind these changes (why
have they done this, changed that, placed this barrier here instead of
there, etc.). The observation process also has to be backed up with a
set of interviews with the key actors responsible for the infrastructure: architects, shop managers, airport authority and state officials
responsible for technical aspects. All these actors should be asked
the same fundamental questions so that the answers can be compared and interpreted. The second part of the interview is freer and
more flexible and relates more to the individual (feelings, personal
opinion, area of competence, wishes, interests, discomfort, etc.).
When this research phase is done and analyzed, the second phase
consists of live tests done on actors and spectators and experimenting with the results: It consists of invading the field with actions to resist the process of public space grabbing, for example.
Another important part is publicizing the issue to the media with
maps and narratives in order to alert passengers and to launch
"participative mapping projects" with them. This could challenge
the involvement and impact of the main actors on people, airline

companies, social evolution, consumption society, and ultimately
the environment and climate.
The proposed methodology is rather typical for a "radical cartography" approach to a phenomenon. First: data collection, visualization and analyses, finding gaps as "abnormal" situations;
second: direct action in the field, on the space itself, involving the
actors and spectators live in an "act of resistance". In other words,
a process of linking information and action, or "providing the
knowledge" and "implementing the resistance".
The Symbol
At the end, these maps describe a process that more and more deprives the public of freedom of movement while reinforcing control
and surveillance. This is being imposed on society without consent. A
sort of "rape" of our freedom. I wanted to cartographically ring a bell…

Everywhere – in Post Offices, Stations, Airports and
Streets – Public Space Is Being Privatized and Pedestrians Are Being Diverted through Commercial Spaces

A few years ago I was at the recently renovated Kristiansand-Kjevik airport in Norway. My flight was delayed, so I looked around
for a place where I could have a drink with the people who had
come to see me off. But the café was on the other side of the security control. An hour went by with no plane, no news – and no
information desk. I would have had to go to the boarding gates in
order to find out what was happening, but the door that used to
lead to the gates was closed. So I asked a security guard at the entrance to the duty-free shop how to reach them. He said I would
have to go through the shop. I explained I was just going to find out
what was happening, expecting I would be able to come back the
same way. He said that would not be possible: If I went through
the shop, I would have to go through customs again.
Instead of going directly down a public corridor to the gates,
I had to walk through a shop filled with toys, perfumes, chocolates and bottles of gin. The terminal used to be open-plan but was
now divided into three sections, with access from one to the next
strictly controlled.
The next month, I found out on the tarmac that my two-and-ahalf year old son had filled his pockets with packets of sweets and
a bottle of Chanel No 5 he had picked up in the duty-free shop that
all travellers had to pass through to get to the boarding gates.
These incidents were the inspiration behind the Duty-Free Shop
Project and investigating the novel strategies for the organization of
space and foot traffic which are changing the nature and purpose of
public spaces. At European airports I observed movements, objects,
attitudes of airport staff, the decor, lighting, design and signage, and
drew maps to explain the changes and their significance.
Those responsible for the changes are the airport authorities, the
transport ministries and the companies that manage the commercial spaces and airport services. It's a theatrical production: They
cast and train the stars and the extras: security guards, duty-free
shop staff, airline ground staff, customs officials, police – and
travellers; they collaborate on the interior layout of the terminals;
they decide on the decor, the lighting and fields of vision. Which

You Must Buy before You Can Fly

245

areas should be "open" and which "closed"? Everything is designed
to bring passengers to the point where they are ready to buy.
The airport authorities deny any involvement in the changes. Jo
Kobro, former head of media relations at Oslo Airport said, "The
shop managers decide their selling strategies individually" (while
being unable to look me in the eye), but the stores make money
and the airport authorities get a cut.

Retail Therapy after the Ordeal

The vulnerability of civil aviation became clear in the 1950s, after
two aircraft had been blown up over North America by bombs in
their baggage holds, in 1949 and 1955 (the bombers' motives were
marital infidelity and life insurance fraud). However, for nearly
half a century longer, airports were relatively open places where
families came for an exciting day out, to stare at VIP passengers
and daydream in front of posters advertising exotic destinations.
The bombings of UTA (Union des Transports Aériens) flight 772
in 1988 and Pan American Airlines flight 103 in 1989 led to stronger surveillance and security systems, but the 9/11 attacks marked a
new era: Air travel suffered a slump that lasted until 2005, and airlines as well as airport authorities faced an unprecedented crisis.
Many airports and airlines initially received massive public subsidies,
especially in North America, but airports were soon told to cover
their own running costs. This was all the more difficult, because the
taxes on air tickets had been significantly reduced, or even temporarily waived, in order to stimulate growth. Airport management was
outsourced to private, public or mixed public-private enterprises.
The new managements' solution was to turn airports into commercial spaces. Some became little towns, complete with supermarkets, duty-free shops, parking garages, hotels, business and
conference centres. The airports took a cut based on turnover (the
figures are not published).
After 9/11 the airports also revised their approach to surveillance
and security. The "outside world" is now strictly separated from
the "inside world", and crossing from one to the other means being scanned, searched, patted down and dispossessed of any object
that presents a "threat" (including a bottle of mineral water).
Airports have become hyper-commercialized and hyper-securitized
spaces, in which travellers are held prisoner. Management companies have reorganized the flow of passengers through terminals,
turning them into laboratories in which subtle spatial modifications are tested. The goal seems to be to determine how to make the
most money from passengers, who are manipulated and channelled
through specially designed zones filled with tempting merchandise.
Everything in the "inside" space is regulated, from the freedom to
gather in groups to photography. No complaints or choices of route
are allowed. It is a capitalist and monopolistic economy, in which
just a few multi-nationals run hundreds of shops, restaurants, bars
and airline ground services, contracted out to local operators. The

right to information is denied: Notices mentioning "passenger
rights" are placed where they are least visible, in dark corners or behind pillars. Advertising based on themes such as dreams, travel and
sex distracts attention from the way public space has been hijacked.
The first step is to disorientate passengers. Security guards and
duty-free shop staff wear almost identical uniforms. Shop staff
are responsible for keeping order in and around the shops; security guards act as touts for the shops. At Kristiansand-Kjevik, a
guard pointed with authority to one of the two doors behind him,
so nearly all the passengers off a flight from Copenhagen were diverted into the duty-free shop. Nobody saw the door next to it,
which leads directly to the baggage claim area.

Directed to the Shops

The signage uses the same graphic codes to direct passengers to the
boarding gates and to advertise the shops, so passengers think they
are getting directional information, but they are actually reading
an advertisement. They think they are setting off on their journey, only to end up in the shops. At London's Gatwick Airport,
the main toilets are inside the duty-free shop and are treated as a
customer amenity, not a public resource. To board a plane at Brussels, passengers must pass through shops – enforced retail therapy
after the ordeals of check-in and security control.
Less than a decade ago, airport commercial spaces, where everything
has a price tag, were separate from free public spaces, in which everything is free. Today these spaces have merged, and in London, Oslo,
Bergen and Milan, "free" public corridors have simply disappeared.
The two spaces sometimes exist side by side: the carefully designed
commercial world, brightly lit, filled with merchandise, and with colour schemes dominated by brilliant white, bright yellow and red; the
public spaces, where passengers may sit down – if they can find a seat,
often a greenish grey. In airports such as Copenhagen, many seats
have been removed to make room for restaurants and shops. These
uncomfortable zones offer no frills: They are not seen as useful.
These changes affect only a few (only 10-15% of Europeans fly regularly), but they have prefigured what is now happening in other
formerly public spaces, including rail and underground stations,
whole streets and town centres. Paris' Saint-Lazare station has become a shopping centre; at Bodø, in central Norway, the whole of
the main street has been privatised.
This text has been written inside the Oslo Airport. While travelling on one day (I often travel through this airport), I realized that
the public corridor leading to the embarking gates had been closed.
This poem is evocating the slow but powerful changes going on in
our common public spaces. Some invisible people are strategically
organizing this space in which we evaluate, walk, dream or which
we use just to go from one place to another. They are – in a way –
forcing you into environments you would not enter spontaneously on your own, and I felt this was frightening. This poem aims to
remain a symbol of a very specific form of a growing totalitarianism: being forced to consume.
Translation by Charles Goulden

246

Counter-Cartographies Create Visibility

An airport is a zombie zone between two worlds.
Not Never Never Land.
Just Nowhere.
You get temporary citizenship
between check-in and boarding.
They lure and bully you into a dreamscape
of corridors and walkways, and the local paradox
between tightly closed security and wide-open shops.
They confuse you, too.
Everything is signposted and labelled,
but you still don't know where you are;
everything is there to tempt you, luxury goods and foods,
but you feel totally deprived, and trapped.
The retail spaces are seductive,
yet you didn't choose to shop here.
You didn't choose to be here.
They are controlling you, guiding you, harassing you:
Will you be able to resist a purchase?

You Must Buy before You Can Fly

247

Counter-Cartographies
Show Spatial Subjectivity

Visualizing the Counter-Narratives of Port Said

An Experiment of Mapping Social History
Nermin Elsherif
nerminelsherif.wisite.com/othermaps

252

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

History and maps are both social constructions produced by people who attempt to normalize their arguments. But what happens
when this process of production becomes collaborative? And
when arguments reflect the counter-narratives of people, and not
authorities? What happens when primary sources of history are
used instead of their interpretation of historians? Could this contribute to creating a counter-map challenging the official representation of depicted spaces, such as cities, for example?
I would like to write about an experiment of mapping the social
history of Port Said. A port city that was depicted by the states
which were involved in the foundation of the Suez Canal Company, the national Egyptian Survey, as well as different tourist
guides. Each of these maps echoed the interests of its makers and
commissioners. Although the geography of the city is always present in the residents' stories, their songs, and even their everyday
expressions, these bottom-up narratives have never been mapped.
This mapping experiment was part of the History Workshops of
Egypt1 activities that took place from the 27th to the 30th of January
2016. The goal of the workshop was to train young artists, activists
and researchers on the methods of social history. The goal of the
map was to visualize their findings in the form of a map which
then remained in Boulvard, one of the most active cultural venues
of the city. The map-makers worked on collecting primary sources
of history about the city, researching in newspapers, on postcards,
in songs, through personal archives and conducting oral history
interviews with the residents. Collaboratively they redefined the
basics of the map, deciding on the legend, the scale, the extents
and the methods of inscribing history into the map.
Inspired by the community map in the Fietas Museum of South
Africa, the map serves as a board of collective memory of Port Said
residents. After the map-makers had set its foundations and visualized all the collected narratives, they invited the city residents to
the event, celebrating the end of their research workshop where
the map was first introduced to the public. The map was designed
to offer the residents a space to share and visualize their memories by adding their own photos and testimonies regarding the five
historical periods. Up to my knowledge, the map remained a central part of the cultural venue to which other youth initiatives have
also contributed until the venue was closed by the government.

On Scales and Extents

Knowing how the "consistency of scale" would be a limitation of
representing this city, the map-makers decided to use three maps
of different scales: a world map, a map of Egypt and finally a map
of Port Said. Events were thus indicated in their geographic location and elaborated upon in the corresponding timeline panel.
The goal was to recite a counter-history of the city from different
perspectives: Egyptian peasants who were forcibly brought from
Upper Egypt to dig the Canal in 1859, those who arrived from Europe between 1914 and 1918 searching for a safe refuge and hoping
to earn their living, and many others who started in one point of
the world and ended up in this city or vice versa.

The timeline panels show how the density of multiple events in
the year of the Suez War (1956-1957) occupy an area equal to the
calm fifty-five years of city construction (1859-1914). The experiment of visualizing time through the social history of the people showed how a few months were "louder" than several years.
The timeline includes images, scans from the residents' personal
archives, memoirs of travelers, Simsimiyya2 songs and quotes of
the members of civil resistance who were interviewed. It was put
together from the entire material produced and used by the participants of the workshop.

On the Legend

In order to tie together counter-narratives of the city, the legend
for this map had to represent the multiple sources from which
these narratives were taken. With threads of five colors representing themes or sources of social history (personal archives in blue,
state narratives in black, built environment in white, flow of people and goods in green, and finally cultural history seen in songs
and arts in red) different spaces were tied to one timeline. The
pins were used to allocate the threads in the geographic locations,
and the temporal panel was color-coded in order to represent different time intervals. Although it sounds like a complex system
of coding, it evolved naturally through the participants, as they
worked to project the stories they had collected within their geographic and temporal contexts. Just by following the blue thread
representing a personal narrative of a migrating family, tied to a
green pin signifying the years of war, you can understand how and
why the family moved.
The legend of this map became a system for narrating each story
without the dominance of one over another. This resulted in a map
of intersecting and overlapping pins and threads that represented
the plethora of multivalent voices behind all the different stories
of the city. Nevertheless, this also made it difficult for onlookers
to see the overall map behind the threads. This "web" reflected the
complexity of the narrative in a reduced visualization. As any map,
it is a reduction of a complex landscape.

Reading the Map

The map can be read both geographically and chronologically. In
this context, I would like to write about the chronological reading,
since it serves in creating a holistic overview of the map. However,
a geographical reading is always possible if the reader wants to follow the history from a specific location within the city.
In the first interval, most of the used materials were either postcards depicting the wide boulevards and arcades of the European
Quarter, stressing its cosmopolitan nature or depicting the port
and its vast steam ships.
In the second interval, more human faces appear. The photographs and scans from the personal archive of a naval captain who
worked in the Suez Canal Company as a ship guide dominate the
timeline with spatial reference to the port on Port Said's map. The
places he travelled to in Cairo, Alexandria and Paris also appear on
the world map. The dominance of the blue threads representing

Visualizing the Counter-Narratives of Port Said

253

personal archives in that era shows the intensity of the social life
in this city during the interwar period and prior to the Suez War
of 1956.
The third interval is the richest in stories and images, even
though it represents only one year of the Tripartite Aggression of
1956. Here the dominance of the blue threads (personal stories)
can be clearly seen. Almost all of the images within this interval
came from Per Orlow, a Swedish photographer who covered the
war period. His photographs – as the very few visual documents of
the war – document the horrors and the resistance of the people.
This interval also included articles and graphics from flyers and
publications printed by the popular resistance at the time. Quotes
describing the scenes of the war from figures of the popular armed
resistance were pinned to their locations in space and time as well.
By following the threads, the map shows how the whole city became a terrain of war.
The fourth interval only contains sounds of the city. Since
no visual material of the city was found during this research, it is
completely made up of the quotes and songs of residents speaking about their deportation as a result of the wars. Between 1957
and 1975, the city witnessed a constant state of unrest. All that remained in the city were the songs of the popular resistance and the
images of the defeat.
The last interval represents a new image of the city after the
peace treaty with Israel and the declaration of the city as a free
zone. The green threads start to emphasize new borders on the
map, designating the extents of the tax-free goods in the city. The
interval on the timeline shows mostly advertisements for cars,
households and clothes. It also shows pieces of news about the
tax dodgers. During this period, the post-war housing projects,
which extend to the West of the city, were constructed. By looking at the timeline, one could notice the low number of threads
starting from this vast urban region. The few threads indicated
that this was not very present in the collective memory of the city
when compared to the two old districts of the Arab Village and the
European Quarter.
By comparing the five different time intervals to each other and
taking the three spatial scales of the maps into consideration, a
more holistic understanding of the research conducted during
this workshop can be developed. The map gave us the chance to
realize the silent spaces of the city, to which no memories seemed
to be tied. It showed us the centers of struggle and contestation,
of agony and loss, of pride and nostalgia, and also of a capitalist
economy taking over.

A Counter-Map?

At this moment it seems worth it to take a step back from the map
and question whether it can be considered a counter-map or not.
The map – in terms of content – was an attempt to visualize a
counter-history of the city; a history that is constructed through
material from personal archives, songs, testimonies and primary
sources. Moreover, the process of making the map by replacing single authoritarian figures with a group of participants from different backgrounds to collaboratively trace their subjects of research
in place and time is a counteract in itself. It defies the normative
process of map-making. This results in several counter-aspects of
the map, from the legend that shows the multiple sources of the
social history instead of official boundaries to the scale that became
absolutely inconsistent, putting together three different scales of
the world, the country and the city. By the end of the mapping
process, the map appeared to be covered with a complex network
of colored threads and pins that made it difficult for users to decipher and understand its contents when viewing it for the first time.
However, this complexity was also described by the map-makers
who, by looking at the map, realized how difficult it is to visualize
social histories, probably due to the difficulty or even the impossibility of the task. It is hard to say whether this experiment is a
counter-map of Port Said or not, but it is definitely an attempt to
visualize counter-narratives and to defy the normative format of
maps. This experiment shows that it is possible to design a map of
multiple narratives that can be read in multiple ways: geographically, chronologically, and thematically.
Endnotes
1. The History Workshops of Egypt is an initiative founded by the social
historian Alia Mossallam who worked on collecting oral history in different regions of Egypt from Nubia, to Port Said, Alexandria, and Cairo.
More about the initiative, its workshops and outcome can be found
here: historyworkshopsegypt.net
2. A string instrument that came to Port Said from Upper Egypt with the
workers who were forcibly brought to dig the canal. This instrument
turned into a music genre which is related to the identity of the city and
also used as a popular method for reciting history. For more information
see Mossallam (2012).
References
Mossallam, A. 2012. Hikayat Sha’b – Stories of Peoplehood. Nasserism, Popular
Politics and Songs in Egypt 1956-1973. PhD Thesis. London: London
School of Economics.
Illustrations
The map was made as part of the History Workshops of Egypt, along with
the 17 participants and the organizers. The workshop was funded by the
ACSS (Arab Council for Social Sciences).
Photographs by Youmna el Khattam, commissioned by the History Workshops of Egypt.

254

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

Visualizing the Counter-Narratives of Port Said

255

Counter-Cartographies of Exile
Sarah Mekdjian, Anne-Laure Amilhat Szary
antiatlas.net/en

258

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

From Afghanistan to France

The map presented here (see map at the end of the article) sketches
a trail of exile from Afghanistan to France. It was created by H.S.1,
who was seeking asylum in France when we met. H.S. attended
the cartographic workshops titled Crossing Maps that artists and
researchers in geography organized with other asylum seekers and
refugees in Grenoble in May and June 2013.
The map's zenithal view makes it possible to understand the
places and the distances involved at a glance, but it is not the only
perspective that is presented. The map is also drawn from ground
level, using the path pursued, and from inside the trailer behind a
truck. In the frontal view, the mountains around Afghanistan and
Iran break with the zenithal perspective, and so do cars, trucks,
boats and an individual on the road. Returning to ground level,
one perceives the space as a landscape of displacement for H.S.,
who represents himself in his work. This map blurs the dichotomy
between the map as a grid and as a route.
The former is the result of the a priori imposition of codes that
seek to depict a point of reference that is considered stable and
measureable; the latter "provides a representation of the territory
on which [it] is not considered independently from the practices that are deployed […] on the contrary, it is defined within its
structure by the practical engagements of those who record their
wanderings there." (Besse, 2010: 7).
The map From Afghanistan to France (see map at the end of
the article) presents the journey of the traveller-cartographer, using the conventions of established geography and geopolitics (the
names of the countries and of the cities crossed before reaching
France) but also representing the experience of the road (the material and political obstacles that have to be overcome, the hardship
of being confined inside a truck, the encounters with the police...).
This map of exile is not the creation of a totalizing eye; it is
also seen from below, from the walking point of view and the
multiple practices and tactics used to cross geopolitical borders. In
this sense, From Afghanistan to France subverts the conventional
and normative maps of migrations and nation states. Embracing a
point of view from the ground, this map is questioning the "commensurability of Euclidean space, [...] the scientization and regularization, [...], disciplinization of space" (Crampton & Krygier,
2006: 18).
In addition, From Afghanistan to France is not only a cognitive
or mental mapping. In order to read the map, it is necessary to read
the map legend (see map at the end of the article). Here the different symbols do not represent rivers or settlements; instead, they
symbolise the fear, danger, police, injustice, friendship, love… encountered en route.

Counter-Cartographic Workshops

H.S., who created this map, is one of the Grenoble residents who
were invited to take part in the counter-cartographic workshops
(Mekdjian et al., 2014; Mekdjian, 2016) that took place over two
months, in May and June 2013, in Grenoble on the premises of the
association Accueil Demandeurs d'Asile (ada-grenoble.org). This
local association helps individuals seeking asylum in Grenoble to
deal with the administrative procedures that affect them.

The cartographic workshops, initiated by Sarah Mekdjian, geographer, brought together twelve Grenoble residents who were
seeking asylum as well as three artists, Marie Moreau, Lauriane
Houbey, Fabien Fischer, and a geographer, Anne-Laure Amilhat
Szary. The participants came from Sudan, Afghanistan, Armenia,
Eritrea, Azerbaijan, Algeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and others. Some were staying in emergency shelters and hotel
rooms, while others were living on the street or in squats.

A Few Intentions
of the Counter-Cartographic Workshops

The first intention was to collectively produce maps that would
breach some norms of migratory representation, which generally
uses arrows to indicate displacement. Maps are often the result of
a territorial, static and quantitative conception of migration.
Representing movement in its qualitative, sensitive dimensions is particularly challenging. It implies to enquire the points
of view of those who are displaced. In their analysis of trans-Saharan migrations, geographers Armelle Choplin and Olivier Pliez
(2011) explain that many cartographic representations, mostly in
the media, lead "to a vision of a smooth migratory space – in other words: where the continuous line drawings of some migration
routes overshadow the political, police and pecuniary dimensions
of spatial and temporal 'roughness' that mark the routes taken
by migrants". It seems that the hardships, and all the experiences
involved, encountered by the individuals on the trail of exile are
more difficult to represent than is the measuring of the flows of
individuals crossing borders.
Routes and flows are often instinctively depicted by arrows,
feeding Europe's invasion anxiety: "The long strokes that depict
the migration from Africa in the direction of Europe convey the
image of an invasion carried out via multiple routes (the cities of
Ceuta and Melilla, as well as through Libya) that are, however,
rarely used all at once by thousands of migrants. Such maps make
one forget that these flows are marginal with respect to African
migrations and even trans-Saharan migrations. They also lead to a
blurring of the terms 'routes' and 'flows'." (Choplin & Pliez, 2011).
The second main intention of this project was to open a creative space of hospitality in which one could suspend the administrative standards of the "real" and the "fake" refugee. The administrations responsible for granting the right of asylum (the French
Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons – OFPRA – in the first instance, and the National Court of Asylum –
CNDA – in the second instance) seek to define what constitutes a
"true story" and a "real refugee", terms that generate strong symbolic violence (Fassin & Kobelinsky, 2012). The act of seeking asylum
in the signatory States of the Geneva Convention means having
to undergo tests of narrative credibility that are carried out by the
administrations. Every individual is asked to recount the reasons
and the circumstances of the journeys they undertook. The asylum seekers have to provide a "verifiable" account that corresponds
to the statutory definition of a refugee as it is defined by the Geneva Convention of 19512. The recording of proofs is one of the
conditions required for the application to be successful. While the
administrations demand life stories/accounts that are "verifiable"

Counter-Cartographies of Exile

259

in order to approve or reject the asylum application, we seek to
question the idea of "narrative truth". "Narrative truth" is itself inconsistent with the principle of narrative enunciation. According
to the theories of enunciation, the act of enunciating is analysed
as a set of heterogeneous linguistic and non-linguistic elements,
constituted by affective, ethical and political forces. In the case of
asylum procedures, telling "the true story of what happened" cannot be understood outside the political conditions of enunciation
between the judges and the applicants. The politics of testimony
developed by the judges and the Geneva Convention determines
in great part what can be said and not said, heard and not heard.
The notion of "narrative truth" also clashes with the complex
process of memory production and with the subconscious, particularly in a trauma context (Pestre, 2012; Signorini, 2015). In a
text dealing with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the politics
of humanitarian protection, Didier Fassin deconstructs the very
idea of "true" testimonies or narratives: "The point is […] not to
determine whether the Palestinian youth is a combatant or a neurotic, but to acknowledge that he is presented, and even presents
himself, alternately as one and the other. We then seek no longer
to know what his true experience of violence is, but rather, what
the various ordeals of truth to which he is submitted by political
authorities or humanitarian organizations, by religious officials or
psychiatrists, correspond to." (Fassin, 2008: 533).
During the workshops, the researchers and artists collectively
decided to suspend the categories of "truth" and "untruth". They
invited the participants to draw maps dealing with exile and displacement, without the researchers or artists asking any questions
about what "really" or "personally" happened.
Within this frame, Sarah Mekdjian and the participants started
to work on creating a collective and common map legend, reproduced here (see following spread) and used by H.S. We collectively
discussed the most significant words that could express migratory
experiences. Each participants proposed several words. We translated them into different languages as the discussions progressed
and eventually retained the most important ones for the collective.
We then symbolised them by using coloured stickers in various
shapes. The participants chose the system of symbols that they
found most pertinent.

260

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

The following step of the work involved incorporating the collective map legend in the individual maps. In his map titled From
Afghanistan to France, H.S. used the collective map legend to describe some experiences of exile.
Following the work initiated by Sarah Mekdjian, the three
artists proposed other creative protocols in order to produce different forms of enunciation. The purpose was to explore how
different protocols would lead to heterogeneous and polyphonic maps and discourses. Marie Moreau invited the participants
to draw exilic experiences in black marker on large white sheets
of fabric, which were then subsequently partly embroidered (see
photographs above). Lauriane Houbey suggested to remember the
voyages by means of soundscapes (audio document proposed and
produced by the artist), while Fabien Fischer produced another
audio document with the participants on the urban life in Grenoble. Nasruddin Farouk Gladeema created a three-dimensional
map in clay entitled The World is Stopping Us (see photograph on
previous spread and photograph to the right). Cartographies Traverses/Crossing Maps is the name of the visual and sound device
composed of all these creative cartographic works.
Cartographies Traverses/Crossing Maps seeks to critically
engage views of migrations: in the rubbing out, the silences, the
gaps, the changes in perspective from the sky to the ground, the
forks and the hesitations one catches a glimpse of the movement
of memory that these maps convey. The maps are neither true, nor
false. Cartographies Traverses/Crossing Maps figures trajectories
of memory; it extends an invitation to read maps and accept the
possibility of losing one's bearings in them.
Translation by André Crous

Endnotes
1. The use of the initials has been decided by the person itself.
2. Article 1 - Definition of the term “refugee”. For the purposes of the
present Convention, the term “refugee” shall apply to any person who
[…] owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race,
religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing
to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his
former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing
to such fear, is unwilling to return to it” (Geneva Convention,1951).

Illustrations
Maps by H.S., Nasruddin Farouk Gladeema, Alishum Ahmedin, Marie Moreau,
Kanké Tounkara, Issa Ibrahm Ahmid, Ahmedin A., S.A.
Photographs by Mabeye Deme

References
Besse, J.-M. 2010. Cartographies. Les Carnets du paysage, 20: 5–9.
Choplin, A. & Pliez, O. 2011. De la Difficulté de Cartographier l’Espace Saharo-Sahélien. Mappemonde, 3(103).
mappemonde.mgm.fr/num31/intro/intro2.html, 13 January 2018.
Crampton, J.W. & Krygier, J. 2006. An Introduction to Critical Cartography.
ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies, 4(1): 11–33.
Fassin, D. 2008. The Humanitarian Politics of Testimony: Subjectification
through Trauma in the Israeli–Palestinian Conflict. Cultural Anthropology,
23(3): 531–558.
Fassin, D. & Kobelinsky, C. 2012. Comment on Juge l’Asile. L’Institution Comme Agent Moral. Revue française de sociologie, 4(53): 657–688.
Mekdjian, S. 2016. Les Récits Migratoires Sont-Ils Encore Possibles Dans le
Domaine Des Refugee Studies? Analyse Critique et Expérimentation
de Cartographies Créatives. ACME: An International Journal for Critical
Geographies, 15(1): 150–186.
Mekdjian, S., Amilhat-Szary, A.-L., Moreau, M., Nasruddin, G., Deme, M.,
Houbey, L. & Guillemin, C. 2014. Figurer les Entre-Deux Migratoires.
Pratiques Cartographiques Expérimentales entre Chercheurs, Artistes
et Voyageurs. Carnets de géographes, (7). carnetsdegeographes.org/carnets_terrain/terrain_07_01_Mekdjian.php, 13 January 2018.
Pestre, E. 2012. Le Réfugié : un Sujet en Péril Psychique et Politique (Note de
Recherche). Revue Asylon(s), (9).
reseau-terra.eu/article1246.html, 14 January 2018.
Signorini, V. 2015. Producing Memory: Narratives of Suffering in the Asylum
Experience. Subjectivity, 8(4): 382–408.

Counter-Cartographies of Exile

261

Textile Maps

1

Using Sensitive Mapping for Crossovers Between Academic and Vernacular Worlds
in the Sidi Yusf Working-Class Neighbourhood in Marrakech
Élise Olmedo

264

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

In this project, we consider textile maps as part of the broader topic of sensitive mapping. By retracing geographical research carried
out in Morocco between 2010 and 2016, this article introduces an
evolving map-making project with women from the Sidi Youssef
Ben Ali neighbourhood in Marrakech – more commonly known
as Sidi Yusf, a city in Southeast Morocco. This textile mapping is
a post-visual art which is used to render places as they are experienced and lived in by the women of a working-class neighbourhood. More broadly, it proposes geographical fieldwork tools for
understanding the complexity of spaces: what one feels in a certain place from a sensory and emotional perspective, and how this
is connected to the surrounding space. This qualitative mapping
seeks to establish a sensitive link to geographical knowledge.

From Fieldwork to the Writing of Research: A Relational Approach to Cartography

Reintroducing Sensitivity to Cartography
Relational approaches focus on the co-production in research
processes. They concentrate on the relation between researchers
and participants, which in turn creates the research object itself.
In these approaches, mapping processes have been reconceptualised: Cartography does not merely represent, but rather generates
something that results from the involved persons' relation. By
emphasizing the importance of haptic perception in mapmaking,
this mapping is about reintroducing sensitivity to the production
of geographical knowledge. By taking an interest in how we experience space and how this creates geographical visibility, sensitive mapmaking emphasizes the social and gendered dimension
of urban practices, from domestic situations to public spaces of
Marrakech. These textile maps display the lived spaces and routes
of working-class women who live in this neighborhood. The geographic knowledge is depicted through cartographic gestures,
combined in the production of the maps themselves (creation),
and in the map reading (reception). The mapmakers sew and embroider, and the readers touch and manoeuvre the map to read it.
While requiring a tactile appreciation alongside a visual one, these
maps question the hierarchy of the senses, and examine the visual
primacy in geographical thinking. Thus, textile mapping demands
the involvement of the body in producing, perceiving, and understanding geographical knowledge.
The cartography on which this article focuses has been field-tested, both in its research and its diffusion. The objective of sensitive
mapping is to include the sensitive dimension of spaces through
the elaboration of language in relation to the location of the research, be it in the field or the place in which it is displayed (laboratories, academic events, symposia). The cartographic research
presented here is therefore produced in situ, in the presence of
people, with different degrees of participation, depending on the
contingency of this sensitive situation. Thus, the cartography is
used as a means of creating links between researchers and participants in places where these are constructed.

Marrakech: Retroactive Fieldwork
The sensitive maps that are displayed here have been created on
the basis of two field investigations. This allowed for both, an
empirical observation of the practices in women's lived environments and a glimpse at their daily lives. Nonetheless, the two surveys had different functions within the research. The first field
investigation (2010) provided qualitative research by combining
qualitative interviews and participant observations of fifteen people over the course of two and a half months. These were primarily
women from working-class neighbourhoods, predominantly with
rural origins, who were interviewed in order to define their relationship to urban spaces. The second field investigation (2014)
involved working together with the same people for the duration
of one month. During this time the results of the work carried out
in 2010 were presented, submitted and validated. The textile map
from 2010 (see textile map showing living spaces of women from
Sidi Yusf) played a prominent role in the presentation of the results about working spaces and lived spaces. It allowed us to create
what I refer to as a "retroactive fieldwork", using a tactile language.
Allowing these women to see and touch the fabric while recounting their own experiences of the city created a sensitive experience
that activated memories of a place where they had lived together in
2010. From this cartographic narrative emerged both, vernacular
and academic knowledge. These initial exchanges about the subject of the textile map even gave rise to the idea of creating a second map (see textile map of Sidi Yusf) with Naïma, one of the participants. Five other local women were involved, as well as Hanane
Hafid, PhD student of geography at the University of Marrakech,
who served as a translator for the collective project. Far from being
a prerequisite for academic research, this map places a retroactive
loop in the construction of knowledge, in which the sensitivity is
placed at the forefront of the mode of operation of the map.
These maps highlight the complexity of the relationship between
the women of Sidi Yusf and places they live and work in. They
were created by using classic academic techniques, such as qualitative interviewing, participant observations and field drawings.
The depicted areas reflect a diversity of spaces, from the home to
the city of Marrakech, from domestic to public spaces. This physical mapmaking allows for the materialization of urban practices
while providing information on social relations with regards to
class, gender, and race.
The textile map from 2010 (see textile map showing living spaces
of women from Sidi Yusf) is composed of two parts and two kinds
of material. On the right side, the domestic part has been created
with an inexpensive fabric normally used to stitch the inner lining
of the traditional Moroccan clothing (Djellabah). This part shows
the two main areas in these women's lives. The home is depicted
here by a patchwork square made of many different fabrics that
represent the multifunctional character of the domestic space. It
consists of many forms that reflect the places that change over the
course of the day (dining room, reception room, sleeping area)
and the places frequented in the immediate vicinity of the home
(hammam, food shop, bread oven, butcher, souk). The other part
of the map on the left side represents informal places of work that
essentially involve household chores, with the Medina and the

Textile Maps

265

Mapping: Cartography as a Research Process

The research responds to an observation made about underestimating the importance of field work. By understanding space, field
practice allows a processual construction of knowledge adapted
to live situations in constant evolution (Olmedo, 2015). Sensitive mapping investigates the role of sensitivity in the academic
production of spaces. By inviting us to reconsider the sensitive
dimension of spaces, it demonstrates that experience should not
only be considered in human and social sciences. Instead experience itself should also be the subject of research, as it may be able
to shift perspectives and thus introduce an operational dimension. We should therefore consider this research area as an actively evolving space. In this sense, there is no more insurmountable
schism between the field and the laboratory or the researcher and
the participants of the research.

Guéliz neighbourhood being prominent. The two parts are joined
by a central knot – the Jemâa-El Fna square. This is a reference
point for these often illiterate women, whose mobility is contingent on their work, and also depends on social links governed by
class and gender. It is mostly these links that dictate where women from poor neighborhoods can walk through the city and work.
This map is a piece of research that was completed upon my return
from the field. It displays the complexity of these womens' experiences in the city of Marrakech, taking Naïma's case as an example.
The second textile map was created collectively after returning to the field in 2014. The objective was to present the results
to the women who were involved (see textile map of Sidi Yusf).
This collaborative work was made possible by returning to Marrakech in order to show the works created during the original
project. The first map was presented to the women by means of
cartographic narration, and they were invited to touch the map.
In recounting their lives to the women of the neighbourhood, we
were able to discuss the ways in which the women's situation had
changed since 2010. We were also able to talk about the durability
of fabric as a cartographic language. These exchanges, translated
by Hanane Hafid, led to the fabrication of the second map with
Naïma's help and that of other women from the neighbourhood.
Since the women approved of the first map in our discussions, the
second map presents the same spatial characteristics. However,
these characteristics are expressed differently. We can see lived
spaces where the home is represented by yellow pieces of fabric
woven together and where white routes leading to Jemaâ-El Fna
square are shown in a green fabric. Another piece of white fabric
represents the workplace.
The map not only expresses the potentials of mapping as a geographical result of demonstrating the geographical representation
of individuals who are dealing with a new agency of geographical
knowledge. From a practical perspective, it is also about the constitution of an iterative process of knowledge production, whose
specifics will be presented now.

266

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

It is here that the notion of "mapping" occurs (Cosgrove, 1999),
a notion that describes the cartographic process. In our case, the
idea of a cartographic process allows for a sensitive approach to
map-making. Rather than the conception of an individual map, it
is the entirety of the processes which is most important for the realization of the cartographic project and its subsequent perception.
We become less interested in the object itself, and more interested
in its use.
Making the Maps
The first instance is about emphasizing the process of creating
textile cartography. These maps were the product of several days
of work, reels of thread and fabric bought in the Souk in Sidi Yusf,
hours of discussions, creative hands, skills – particularly in the
fields of embroidery and traditional Moroccan sewing – and lastly
the help of a local tailor for the final assembly of the map in 2014.
They are therefore composed of "cartographic gestures": cutting
fabric, assembling, sewing, embroidering, that allow for a physical
expression of knowledge (Olmedo, 2015). In this sense, we place
special emphasis on the way in which bodily knowledge of spaces
manifests itself in the malleability of the map, both in the physical
act of creation and in a formalization of properly communicating
this geographic knowledge with others.
Following each participant's involvement, these maps have been
created in collaboration with the people whose aim it was to visualize and shape the different perspectives on the map. The map
resonates with the sensitive areas and the people who frequent
them. This perspective is mediated by the place and time in which
the map was made, as well as by the modes of language that were
used (oral and textile). In this particular case, the map was created
through discussions and textile work.
This work also debates epistemological questions with regards
to geography. Based on a critique of representational geography,
we are interested in the appearance of "post-representational",
"non-representational" (Thrift, 2008), or "more-than-representational" thinking (Lorimer, 2010). We believe in the importance
of these concepts for regenerating the concept of geography. At
the same time, we distance ourselves from them because of their
apolitical approach. From a more anthropological perspective, we

consider sensitive map-making as a relational medium that denotes a departure from map-as-object. The idea of an object in
process (see illustrations), otherwise known as mapping, replaces
the framework of map-as-image.
Sewing Together: Collaboration and Cartography
This project attempted to research the participants' sensitive relationship to their spaces, the sensitive contact between the researcher and the participants as well as the role of the translator,
using local materials and creative methods. What place do these
specific languages have in the field of cartography? How do we
allow for situation-appropriate map-making in order to avoid reproducing power relationships linked to cartographic knowledge
(Burini, 2008)? These maps are collaborative, encouraging the
construction of an in-situ knowledge for which the researcher
collaborates with the participants of the research. In this research,
mapmaking is considered the medium through which the researcher and the participants come together.
On the other hand, this form of mapping raises the question of
cartographic language: It encourages the creation of field-adapted cartographic languages. These are born out of interaction with
locals in the field, based on which we aim to produce cartographic documents: co-authorship, processual geographical reasoning,
creative expression of an empirical phenomenon witnessed "on
the spot". These maps are indeed phases of work aimed at experimenting with the ways in which we can depict a lived environment. Their language is therefore dependent on the research
location while seeking to correspond to the lived situation of the
research participants. Each map generated several cartographic
experimentations, allowing for a final product that is as close a
representation as possible of the lived situation. The final maps
synthesize individual experiences. The different versions correspond to one research process – the exploration of a contextual
and open language – that should incrementally improve.

Towards New Cartographic Ethics

At the end of this project, rather than being a representation, the
map is a production of space. While retaining the requisite characteristics for mapping – those of depicting space – this project
proposes new ways of creating and appreciating maps. By no longer considering the map as an object but rather as the result of its
co-creation, we approach the idea of cartography as something
that is practiced in relation to a given sensitive situation and is
therefore contingent on its creators. In this regard it is more of an
"expression of space" inspired by artistic contribution to cartography (Wood, 2006).
This project also raises the question of the possibility for the participants of the research to access the results of the conducted
research. These non-textual maps encourage a cartography that
takes into account the reality of social situations – in our case the
illiteracy of the majority of our participants. The map created in
2010 was initially considered to be a means of communicating an
overview of the research results to the participants. What is more,
returning to the field in 2014 allowed me to devise research over

the course of several years (four years had passed between my first
visit to Sidi Yusf in 2010). By returning to Sidi Yusf, I was able to
present the results to the research participants without replicating
power relationships in the communication of knowledge. These
comings and goings make it possible to reflect on the access to
knowledge, as these maps were as pertinent to geographers as they
were to illiterate women. Textile maps create channels between
the world of science and the world of participants of research.
By reintroducing sensitivity to the creation of geographical knowledge, this kind of mapping allows for a complex understanding of
geography for non-academic audiences. By reintroducing the haptic sense, this cartography makes knowledge something that can
be grasped with your senses. This is the case for both, the makers
of the maps seeking to understand and cope with their daily lives,
as well as the readers aiming for a tactile understanding of these
experiences.
Translation by Samuel Fraine
Endnotes
1. This chapter is an abridged English translation of an article published by
the author in the review Cartes & Géomatique sponsored by the French
Committee of Cartography (CFC) in 2016, 229: 135-145.
lecfc.fr/new/articles/229-article-16.pdf, June 27 2018.
This article and all its illustrations are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License (CC
BY-NC-ND 4.0).
References
Burini, F. 2008. La cartographie participative et la pratique du terrain dans la
coopération environnementale: la restitution des savoirs traditionnels
des villages de l’Afrique subsaharienne. À travers l’espace de la méthode:
les dimensions du terrain en géographie, 18-20 June 2008, Arras.
Cosgrove, D. 1999. Mappings. London: Reaktion Book.
Lorimer, H. 2005. Cultural geography : the busyness of being “more-than-representational. Progress in Human Geography, 29(1): 83–94.
Olmedo, E. 2015. Cartographie sensible. Tracer une géographie du vécu par la
recherche-création. PhD Thesis. Paris: Paris 1 Panthéon Sorbonne.
Olmedo, E. 2010. Cartographie sensible, émotions et imaginaire. Visions cartographiques. visionscarto.net/cartographie-sensible, 15 June 2018.
Thrift, N. J. 2008. Non-representational theory: space, politics, affect, Milton Park.
Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge.
Wood, D. 2006. Map Art. Cartographic Perspectives, 53: 5–15.
Illustrations
Map on following spread left by Elise Olmedo, 2010.
Map on following spread right by Naïma S., Hanane Hafid, Elise Olmedo and
women of Sidi Yusf, 2014.

Textile Maps

267

Textile map showing living spaces of women from Sidi Yusf.

Textile map of Sidi Yusf.

Imaging Homelessness in a City of Care

Participatory Mapping with Homeless People
Oliver Moss, Adele Irving
esrcimaginghomelessness.wordpress.com

270

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

Imaging Homelessness in a City of Care was a participatory mapping
project undertaken with 30 single homeless people in Newcastle-upon-Tyne (UK) in 2014. The project's objectives were threefold: to pilot an innovative mapping-based methodology; to offer
single homeless individuals an opportunity to comment on local
service provision and delivery; and to inform and challenge public perceptions of homelessness. In what follows, we outline the
context for the project and the reasons for adopting a mapping
approach. We then discuss the research process and the various
insights generated. Finally, we reflect on the effectiveness of the
methodology used.

Research Context

The term "single homelessness" refers to adults without dependent
children who are not entitled to housing provision under homelessness legislation in England. In the absence of formal monitoring processes, it is a category of homelessness which remains
largely unquantified. Figures indicate, however, that rough sleeping levels have increased by 134% since 2010 (DCLG, 2017). The
increased visibility of homelessness on our streets is provoking
mixed reactions. Gifts and donations to many homelessness charities have increased, while greater engagement with street homelessness by faith-based groups is also evident (Cloke et al., 2012).
At the same time, media scrutiny of the character and morality of
homeless people has also increased (Fitzpatrick & Pawson, 2014),
and punitive responses to street homelessness also remain prevalent (Harding & Irving, 2014). In this highly polarised context, it
is important to both inform and challenge public perceptions of
homelessness.

Research Process

The research proceeded by means of six workshops with 30 rough
sleepers and users of supported accommodation. Participants
were encouraged to annotate two-dimensional maps of the Newcastle city centre with reflections on the spaces, places and experiences significant to their life courses. The maps played a useful
prompting role in the surfacing of participants' experiences, attitudes and values. Many participants were engaged with following
a night of rough sleeping, meaning the articulation of life events
through conventional talk-based methods would likely have proven challenging. Furthermore, the intuitive nature of map-making was intended to empower participants to take control of the
research process. The generated mappings were shared with the
artist Lovely JoJo, who prepared a "composite" map. The aim here
was to present the participants' perspectives in a manner that was
deliberately lo-fi and therefore in keeping with their selective and
subjective nature.

Findings

The composite map displays a complex and often contradictory
mix of practices. First, it highlights the large diversity of pathways
along which individuals progress into homelessness; "evidence"
that, while some people may be more predisposed to falling into
homelessness, ultimately, anyone can fall victim. Second, the map
highlights the daily challenges associated with street homelessness, as well as the multiplicity of survival strategies employed in
response. While many of the strategies in evidence resonate with
existing stereotypes, they can also be viewed as instances of "individuals cleverly deploying their creativity, competence and cultural
knowledge to survive" (Duneier, 1999: 312). Third, it presents a series of counter-readings of the use of city spaces and forms. Doorways, for example, are reproduced as social and sleeping spaces,
while pipes and ducts are shown to provide a modicum of warmth
and comfort. Fourth, the map reveals a range of behaviours and
activities characteristic of "normal" functioning lifestyles, thus
presenting the participants as fully emotional subjects with needs,
desires and a genuine sense of themselves (May & Cloke, 2014).
Finally, it depicts the variety of the city's homelessness services.
While there was evidence of punitive responses to homelessness,
most participants spoke highly of the received support.

Participatory Mapping as a Social Research Method

The map proved highly effective in capturing the imaginations
of audiences. The project's launch was attended by over 60 policy makers, practitioners and academics. The project blog has received over 5,000 hits from over 40 countries, and the map has received widespread media coverage, with an audience reach of over
2.5 million. The positive reaction appears to be based on the ability of the map to engage audiences instinctively and emotionally.
Those offering comments stressed how the map served to emphasise the many different meanings assigned to the city, whilst also
humanising discussions of homelessness. Comments included: "I
found the maps of the participants and Lovely JoJo deeply affecting. I find myself returning to them and reconsidering the places
I thought I knew."

Imaging Homelessness in a City of Care

271

However, the composite map is not without limitations. It does
not provide an objective picture of homelessness in Newcastle-upon-Tyne. On the contrary, it is a social construction with
its own performative character. Participants selected information
to be mapped based on their "in-the-moment" subjective realities.
Furthermore, the map is only partially able to depict the complexity of homelessness. Objects and events which lack geographical
specificity (e.g. mobilities) are frequently obscured, despite the array of arrows and symbols. Therefore, mapping processes such as
this one are probably most useful when used in combination with
other methods of data collection.

Conclusion

For us, the experience of participatory mapping has confirmed
the suggestion that many traditional methods of social science
fail to engage with the many aspects of everyday life, thus lying
outside the narrow discourse. There are, on occasions, thoughts,
feelings and experiences that are simply "unspeakable". The value
of maps such as this one, therefore, lies in their ability to engage
an audience instinctively and emotionally, rather than through
"rational" argument. Creative approaches to writing, mapping
and image-making appear to be just some of the ways in which
researchers can seek to access and communicate embodied and
pre-reflexive knowledge.

References
Cloke, P., Johnsen, S. & May, J. 2012. Ethical citizenship? Faith-based Volunteers
and the Ethics of Providing Services for Homeless People. In Beaumont,
J. & Cloke, P., eds. Faith-Based Organisations and Exclusion in European
Cities. Bristol: Policy Press: 127–152. researchportal.hw.ac.uk/en/publications/ethical-citizenship-faith-based-volunteers-and-the-ethics-of-prov,
14 January 2018.
Department for Communities and Local Government 2017. Rough Sleeping
Statistics. Autumn 2016, England. London: Department for Communities
and Local Government. gov.uk/government/statistics/rough-sleeping-inengland-autumn-2016, 14 January 2018.
DeVerteuil, G. 2003. Homeless Mobility, Institutional Settings, and the New
Poverty Management. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space,
35(2): 361–379.
Duneier, M. 1999. Sidewalk. First edition. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Fitzpatrick, S. & Pawson, H. 2014. Ending Security of Tenure for Social Renters:
Transitioning to ‘Ambulance Service’ Social Housing? Housing Studies,
29(5): 597–615.
Harding, J. & Irving, A. 2014. Anti-Social Behaviour among Homeless People:
Assumptions or Reality? In Pickard, S., ed. Anti-Social Behaviour in Britain.
London: Palgrave Macmillan: 155–165.
link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/9781137399311_13, 14 January 2018.
Jocoy, C.L. & Del Casino, V. 2010. Homelessness, Travel Behavior, and the Politics of Transportation Mobilities in Long Beach, California. Environment
and Planning A, 42(8): 1943–1963.
May, J. & Cloke, P. 2014. Modes of Attentiveness: Reading for Difference in
Geographies of Homelessness. Antipode, 46(4): 894–920.
Illustrations
Map by Lovely JoJo’s (lovelyjojos.com)

272

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

Imaging Homelessness in a City of Care

273

274

275

Tyneside’s Skateworlds and Their Transformation

Production and Consumption of Participatory Post-Representational Cartographies

Jon Swords, Mike Jeffries
accidentalyouthclub.wordpress.com

276

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

Post-representation cartography is an approach to mapping which
emphasizes the processes involved in map-making. The emphasis shifts from "the 'rules' of map design and techniques of cartographic production, and/or documenting and deconstructing the
underlying ideologies and agendas of maps, to a processural perspective concerned with how mappings and cartographic design,
technique and ideology emerge time and again through a plethora
of practices framed within a complex discursive and material context, and the diverse, unfolding work of mappings in the world"
(Kitchin et al., 2013: 481). Thus post-representation cartography is

concerned with how representations of the worlds around us become maps through, on the one hand, the use of certain technologies, tropes and methodologies by cartographers (in the broadest
possible sense), and on the other hand, how users unfold and recognize maps anew through their style, content and conventions. In
some contexts, something which isn't traditionally thought of as a
map, may thus become one because it is used as a map. In this way
maps become "writerly texts" where the "purpose is to see texts as
producing an open series of readings, each of which requires that
the reader also be in part author of meaning" (Pickles, 2004: 174).
The map you see here is the result of a project with skateboarders to understand their appropriation of space in Tyneside, in
the North East of England, undertaken in 2009-10. Our primary
methodology was to ask skaters to map their worlds, but what we
actually got were fascinating sketches and doodles full of insight
and emotion. In a previous piece we have explained how these
sketches and doodles became maps through our analysis and use
as locational technologies, and were subsequently aggregated into
the map you see here (Swords & Jeffries, 2015; see also Jenson et
al., 2012, for insights into the activities of skateboarders). In what
follows, we adopt a post-representational approach to explain
how the map has unfolded to take on other forms through its use
in a variety of contexts.

Primary Uses

We originally created the mappa mundi of Tyneside's skate scene
to give something back to research participants and avoid an extractive research process. We've given out hundreds to skaters,
their parents, friends and other interested parties. The skaters are
mainly male, under 25, and include locals and students. There are
older skaters who lend experience and building skills to help improve spots such as the Wasteland. We further involved skaters in
the project by giving them the opportunity to exhibit their photography and video-making alongside maps from the project in an
exhibition. In this gallery context the map changes function from
a tangible "thankyou" to artwork, and thus the kind of interaction with it shifts, too. The map becomes an object of beauty and
contact, countering the portrayal of skaters as unruly, their world
hidden from public view. The content of the map is also seen in a
different light as the exhibition took place at Dance City in 2010, a
publically funded cultural institution with a curatorial role that legitimizes the work it shows. The skateworld of Tyneside, then, is
not only made "official" in the production of a map by academics,
but also in the context it was displayed. It thus becomes a political

device that implicitly criticizes "authoritative" maps of Tyneside,
which exclude people such as skateboarders. The physical existence of the map explicitly counters the city centre maps, which
focus on either decorous heritage or contemporary consumption.
The map created an opportunity for skaters to represent and
eulogize their world, giving them permission to be proud. This
was demonstrated as skaters showed their parents what they had
contributed and the spots they went to around the city. Exploratory processes such as this one also illustrate the role of the map as
something to examine and learn from. We learnt the social dimensions of skate spots, the journeys skaters take between them, and
how they are valued within the community. Skaters shared with us
stories and legends of tricks of the past, and the temporal and spatial rhythms of their world. We heard of the old lady who felt safe
when skaters were around, the deal between skaters and security
guards at the Law Courts for access after work, and the dangers of
jumping Leazes 13. The skateboarders discovered new spots, each

Tyneside’s Skateworlds and their Transformation

277

other and the fact that people
value their presence in the city.
Like many other maps, its
"mapness" means it functions
as a historical record of the
skate scene. The Wasteland,
Leap of Faith and Library
Plaza no longer exist as the
buildings they were part of
have been knocked down and
redeveloped, so this map is the
only "official" record of their
location. The map was never designed as a navigational
tool, although it would help
to find spots, and its historical
dimension adds an element of
remembrance.

Subsequent Uses:
a Research Tool, a Calling Card and a Product

The map's mapness has allowed it to be mobilized in a series of
other contexts. It has become desirable and useful for skaters who
weren't involved in the original research. Skate scenes are very visual, and this map has become part of the scopic regime of Tyneside's skateboard community. The existence of the map is an immediate, visible explanation of what we do, its visibility inviting
more skaters to join in. As our work has continued, we give out
the map to participants, and it incentivizes them to take part. It
shows them we are serious about them and their place in the city,
and they can show others that institutions like universities are interested in their lives.
Its visual style adopts tropes from other maps of Tyneside
with the curve of the river on the background layer recognizable
to anyone familiar with the area and the green and yellow lines
connecting skate spots reflect the design and colour of Tyneside's
Metro light rail system. Even skaters who weren't part of the origi-

278

Counter-Cartographies Show Spatial Subjectivity

nal project have been exposed to it and recognize it when we use it
in fieldwork. It thus acts as a calling card when working with new
participants who have often heard, or seen our work.
As our research has continued we have worked with other urban sports groups. The photograph to the right shows BMXers
tracing their world over the skaterboarder's city. The map again
shows this new group we are serious about them, and offers them
an opportunity to counter what to many would be seen as a similar
appropriation of the city. What is revealed in the BMXers version,
however, differs in a number of ways. The most obvious is the
larger territory BMXers can access in a day, their bikes enabling
them to venture further afield. The scale of the spots BMXers
appropriate is also larger. The size of BMX bikes and the greater
speeds they are able to achieve requires long runs ups and outs to
perform tricks safely.
The skate maps have also facilitated responses even in formal
gallery settings where no annotations were requested. In the photograph below you can see our work exhibited at Dance City in
2014. A breakdance festival
was being hosted in the venue,
and a group of dancers aged 8
or 9 added themselves to the
maps on display. This was a
delightful surprise and indicates the map does work by itself to engage young people in
mapping their city. The children pictured felt comfortable
to subvert the conventions
of display to engage with the
mapping process.
Away from fieldwork, the
map also legitimizes us as researchers in meeting with
potential new backers and research partners. We can show
a tangible, interesting output
from a previous project which

fascinates people in a way an executive summary or journal article
can't. Here the map maintains its role as an explanatory tool, but
it also works to show what we're capable of producing. Its mapness again helps here as the process and product are made visible,
which encourages partners to explore what they would like.
To conclude this brief biography of this map, we have tried to
trace the different forms it takes as it unfolds while people use, edit
and re-inscribe it with meaning. It has become a locational tool, a
historical record, artifact, work of art, calling card, a thankyou, an
agent in itself and a prompt for discussion and exploration. It has
taken on these forms in a variety of sites, including the places it
depicts, within cultural institutions, universities, imaginations of
viewers and now in an atlas. It has been unfolded and refolded to
become a legitimatizing tool for us as its original authors as well
as for skaters and others as they re-inscribe it with new meanings.
Now, in its current context, we hope you, the reader, will find your
own meaning in it.

References
Jenson, A., Swords, J. & Jeffries, M. 2012. The Accidental Youth Club: Skateboarding in Newcastle-Gateshead. Journal of Urban Design, 17(3):
371–388.
Kitchin, R., Gleeson, J. & Dodge, M. 2013. Unfolding Mapping Practices: A
New Epistemology for Cartography. Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers, 38(3): 480–496.
Pickles, J. 2004. A History of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Mapping and the
Geo-Coded World. London: Routledge.
Swords, J. & Jeffries, M. 2015. Tracing Postrepresentational Visions of the City:
Representing the Unrepresentable Skateworlds of Tyneside. Environment
and Planning A: Economy and Space, 47(6): 1313–1331.

Tyneside’s Skateworlds and their Transformation

279

play:space newcastle
For some, skateboarders are a public nuisance, vandals, the rebellious youth. For
others, skateboarders portray freedom, enjoyment and creativity. However you
consider them, skateboarders change the way we understand the places they
appropriate within cities. Their actions reject normative uses of urban space as they
flip, grind and ollie their way through a city not always visible to the layperson.
Using spaces rejected by other social groups skaters transform the built
environment into playgrounds and arenas: an innocuous set of steps becomes a
beginner’s rite of passage, a ledge is transformed into an grind block, a bank
becomes a kicker...

skateboard culture was born on the streets
and it is not easily removed...

Gate 7

Boardroom

Marble Ledges

Dynamix 3

McDonalds Whitley Bay Skate Park

We were interested to better understand how skateboarders use, explore and
Diplomat
Southupon
Shields
transform parts of Newcastle
Tyne. We spoke
to as many skaters as we could
Big Gap
find and asked them to map their favourite spots. We Baltic
could have
written a report or
Mini-ramp
journal article to tell Footlocker
everyone what weMega
found,
but not many people would read Home
that. Bargains
Bank
Instead, we created this skater’s mappa mundi as an attempt to summarise
what we
Gateshead
bin gap
Blakelaw
found.

Greggs

Car

BB7

Valley Wasteland

Nativ

Stairs

s a e oa

Undercover 2
“Haymarket
was the central spot.
Tesco Coast
Road
Kickers
It’s
e e ou’
oo u
Marble 2

667 Hilton
Quayside Concrete Quarter Library Ledge
Contemporary Haymarket appears
to be
the least skated spot of the most popular
Ghetto
Shop

Home

Angel of the North

Monument

e s n Ne

as e

Exi Park

Get Carter Car Park

Bus
KFC University
Wallsend Boyza
Eldon Square

sites highlighted by participants. Until recently, skateboarders would frequently use
Cycle
the steps and flat surface
forPark
tricks. In 2002, however, a by-law was passed
excluding skaters from the area which included the threat of a £500 fine for
Smackhead
trangression. It is not
only
since this
restrictionDouble
has been imposed that Haymarket
Dove
Ledge
has been the source of marginalisation, and social resistance. The participants
Rail
revealed Pyramid
that they haveBaltic
faced4a longstanding
effort to maintain skateboarding at
Haymarket. Respondent 4 told how he "used to get a lot of grief off the police".
Hyde Park Ledge
Gateshead
Brick
Quarter by
Despite this, skateboarders have always
presented
some form
of resistance
Civic
Quayside Ledge
Harry Bastard Bank
continuing to skate and then "run away" when the police arrived. Borden suggests
Stair Rail
Park of space for a matter of minutes,
this temporaryHeaton
appropriation
which
is repeated
Bench and
Ledges
Bench
over weeks,
evidence to suggest that there is conflict between the social groups.
WhiteisCollege
Leazes 13

Exi Park

Bu

Smooth P

Barclays

Ma

5
B
Pig & Whistle
Newcastle Uni

Kazbats

5 Set

Newcastle College

A&E

Bus

Bed

Chips

Stairs

Haymarket

Claremont Road Shop

Pil

Hill

China Town

Monumen
Smoo

Mini ramp

“First thing I ever kickflipped”

River 5

University
Main Gate

Church Ledge The

Gateshead Interchange Ledges

Monument

Native
Tea
Baltic mini-ramp
Pig and W

Gap2bench

“Who was the first person to ollie that set like?
Jamie or someone?”

Gap2Benc

“Gary and Kurt were first to try it from what I know. Gary ended up
cracking his head and having to have it stapled up. The first to l
and it was Neil, then Kurt did it and I think the cougar has
landed it (not sure)”

Newcastle College
River 5

Where to go for food?

The Law Court
Opening Times:
Weekdays 6 til late
and all weekend

In his book about architecture and skateboarders, Iain Borden suggests
skateboarders appropriate space by offering a creative re-working of its temporal
and spatial characteristics. This is most clearly illustrated at the Law Courts.
Skateboarding could not be further away from the intended use of the building, but
the continuous appropriation of the double set of eight stairs over a number of years
has created a hybrid space. During the day the steps provide lawyers access to the
Court, in the evening they function as obstacles for tricks. The skateboarders,
however, are aware they are not the dominant force within this informal relationship.
To ensure the Law Courts remains a viable skate spot older skaters educate their
less experienced counterparts about the access arrangements.

its
ied
stif ou s
k ju
tric ious s ect
a
r
f
p
va
fs
eo
anc t with lot o
form re me use a
o
per
e
the h in w re to h
in
u
pus
ess
ect
uen ts to archit
e
uniq mp
Its y atte y of th
n
it
il
.a
..
e ab nt...
...th evide
was

Exhibition Park is the fifth most popular spot highlighted in the maps. 'Exi' was built
in the spring of 2004 and was intended to give the youth a space which was away
from the commercial areas. It was constructed to relieve the pressure put on public
space by young people. The skate park allowed designers to exclude skateboarders
even further within the city centre through anti-skate measures, as they now have a
"place" of their own. In the choice of location, skateboarders were built out of the
city and pushed to the peripheries. The prescriptive nature of Exhibition Park, the
lack of 'buzz' from many separate obstacles, and the proliferation of non-skaters
means the very space created for skateboarders is seen as exclusionary.

32

Police
Library Ledge

Newcastle Uni

Pilgrim St.

ve
ee

o a

Metro

Leazes 13

Spillers Concrete Block
Western Area
Sage Ledges
Gap2bench
Uni Bank

Wasteland

Law Courts

e s a e’

Newcastle College

Banks

Penshaw Monument

grind rail

manual pad

quater pipe

Starbucks

urger King
Laing

Handrail

grind block

Path

anors Flat Bank

Burger King

OK WE PUT A NEW POT IN THE SHOP FOR CEMENT MONEY.
IN 24 HRS WE GOT £12
PETER WAS IN YESTERDAY, HE RECKONS £120 WILL GET A Ertha Kit LOAD
OF CEMENT AND FINISH THE MANNY PAD, NIPPLE AND
SIDES OF THE QUARTER ETC.
IF YOU HAVE ANY SPARE SHRAP AND SKATE THE WASTEGROUND
H N ’
YOU CHIPPED IN.
MAD RESPECT TO ALL INVOLVED IN BUILDING!

Gateshead Ledge

Bridges
“The keyhole”

Banks and 8 set under bridge

“Everything you could want to skate...”

KFC

8 Set

Wasteland

lgrim Street
Ledge

Haymarket

nt
oth Path
Penny

Bench Nan’s House
El Toro

Subway
Cash n Carry

The Heaton Wasteland is another example of a creative re-working of space. The
derelict area of land is a space rejected by most of society, but annexed for the city’s
skate scene by its use as a summer playground for skateboarders. In an
entrepreneurial approach to ensure its enhanced use, skaters have set up a
materials fund to help purchase concrete and tools to build new ramps, rails and
blocks. The area is to be built on soon, but as one skater put it “We’ e had it for ten
ea s e’ us n so e e e e se

am Valley

Whistle

Harry Bastard Bank

ch

Law Courts
Baltic/Sage

ts

y.
’
bilit na e
icka
o
s tr
on

it
ver
se o
s u os o
s
rs
tato

...used by skateboarders because of its
ability to shelter them from the rain

The appropriation of Five Bridges has produced a contrasting outcome to that of
the Wasteland. Whereas both locations have been used by skateboarders for many
years, Heaton is to be destroyed whilst Five Bridges has been transformed into a
legitimate skate location recognised by Gateshead Council and the police. The
temporal patterns of appropriation at Five Bridges contrast the Wasteland’s: Heaton
is used in the summertime, Bridges offers skaters somewhere to go all year around,
no matter the weather.

5 Bridges
“They work there 9-5, so we go there 6
until dark”

“People don’t get mugged or stabbed with hypodermins there when skaters
are occupying the spaces.”

Far Rock

AnneMarie’s Mental Map of New York
Aaron Reiss
aaronreiss.com/far-rock

This map is based on interviews with AnneMarie, who, at thirteen
years old, was struggling with teen pregnancy and her unexpected
success as a young movie actress. AnneMarie's story was the inspiration for Hannah Weyer's novel On The Come Up.
The map depicts Far Rockaway, the isolated neighborhood on the
outskirts of New York City where AnneMarie grew up. I wanted
the map to reflect the isolation of the place as AnneMarie imagined it.
To do that, I started by asking AnneMarie to make a few drawings
of her neighborhood from memory. For one, I asked her to focus
on personal landmarks and how they related to each other geographically. For another, I asked her to map common journeys she
made. Lastly, I asked her to map the neighborhood's boundaries,
edges and places of entry and exit.
Going over her drawings, I saw that her routes and trajectories
would often hit common obstacles (the Nassau Expressway,
the coastline, large government housing complexes, etc.), which
forced her to turn or end her journey. As a young girl, AnneMarie
rarely had cause or opportunity to leave Far Rockaway, and these
obstacles became boundary lines. The map beyond these borders
starts to lighten, and eventually the buildings dissolve into a void.
AnneMarie assumes that the world beyond Far Rockaway is a lot
like her own, but she is not exactly certain what is beyond.

282

The map that I drew imagines Far Rockaway as a kind of island
anchored to the world by a single piece of coastline. The neighborhood itself shows non-descript patterns of structures – the
faceless buildings that don't much concern or interest a child as
they move along their established routes to school or to the corner
deli. Landmarks that give AnneMarie's personal map its reference
points punctuate the patterns: the homes of friends and the major
social institutions that define her life.
Far Rockaway sits on a peninsula at the outer boundary of New
York City, and the A Train is the only subway that reaches it. Far
Rockaway is the last stop on that line. As a young girl without a car,
the A Train was the only way AnneMarie really left her neighborhood. I drew the A Train as the only reference to Far Rockaway
being part of the larger New York City, as an umbilical cord that
connects the socially isolated area to the rest of the city.

Far Rock

283

Counter-Cartographies
as Self-Reflection

Information Overload

From the Map to the Ground, and Back

Elisa T. Bertuzzo, Günter Nest1
habitat-forum-berlin.de

286

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection

1-2-3 – it looks so harmless on the map: a thin line that runs eastwards, then takes a sharp 90-degree turn northwards and again
90-degrees eastwards up to the edge. Yet on the ground, the line
is a concrete wall, built to demarcate the boundary between two
worlds, the "legal" and the "illegal", the accepted and the barely
tolerated. That these boundaries are merely fictional becomes evident once you take a walk along and then cross that wall. Because
the "legal" neighbourhood, with its rusty huts leaning on decrepit-looking apartment buildings and the children playing barefoot
on the roads, doesn't actually differ from what you'll see on the
other side – only that the majority of its residents prefer to take
care of their everyday purchases at the shops and often send their
children to the schools of the neighbourhood behind the wall. On
that side, the same one- and two-storey buildings made of corrugated iron create an even more dense pattern, and the roads are
only partially paved. When taking a closer look, you realise how
the construction of the wall must have cut certain houses and
courtyards in two, and considering the number and shape of the
tin sheets fixed onto it in order to form roofs and carve out rooms,
you may conclude that this has happened some time back. Why
have the two neighbourhoods been separated? Who built that
wall? And what does it all have to do with our map? From the map
to the ground and back, reads its subtitle. It points at the work process from which the map emerged and at its double function: to
represent social relations and personal memories, experiences, insights, and simultaneously encourage self-reflection. But I'll better explain one thing at a time.
The neighbourhood behind the wall, surrounded on all other sides
by what remains of a former canal filled with detriments and illicitly disposed construction waste, is Karail Basti, one of Dhaka's
largest and oldest self-organised settlements. We – a loose network of students and researchers coordinated by the non-profit
Habitat Forum Berlin – have been studying the circumstances
and preconditions of its social production since 2009. It is widely
known that Bangladesh, low-lying on the world's biggest delta, is
exposed to serious risks vis-à-vis global warming and is prone to
seasonal floods and land erosion, due to both the long monsoon
periods and ill-implemented river embankment projects. When
people are forced to leave their villages in the aftermath of related calamities or out of sheer poverty and migrate to Dhaka, the
majority ends up in one of its numerous basti: residential settlements of spontaneous, that is unplanned, origin ("slums", as they
are pejoratively called by many). How do they organise themselves
there? How do they ensure the provision of basic services – water,
electricity, roads, gas – which the authorities generally refuse to
deliver on grounds of the illegal land occupation? How far does
self-organisation reach, and where does its scope end? These are
the main questions we asked ourselves at the beginning of the
research. The sketches and diagrams placed around and inside
the "proper" map offer answers to some of them on the basis of
data gathered within a baseline study in 2012, 2013 and 2014. At
the time, we were mainly concerned with issues such as housing
conditions and production, built infrastructures, as well as public
amenities (open spaces, mosques, market facilities, schools, etc.)
in Karail. Progressively, we embedded all information into a map
of the settlement, drawn on the basis of its Google Earth-picture

of 2013 and amended through on-site verifications, discussions
and workshops with selected groups of inhabitants.2
Our decision to fill a map with the fieldwork evidences (while
also reflecting on it in articles for newspapers and academic journals, field reports, a blog3, etc.) had first of all a practical reason: We
felt that a visual outcome would be easier to review with the inhabitants of Karail, whose language, Bengali, few of us could speak. The
second reason will resonate with other practices of counter-mapping collected in this book. We wanted to oppose official maps of

Dhaka, in which the area covered by Karail Basti was (and to this
date is) portrayed as an empty spot, a state-of-the-arts map, in order to call attention to the existence and everyday struggles of its
more than 100,000 inhabitants. Like many others in this city, they
are literally made invisible by the state and its overall anti-poor attitude in questions of urban development and planning. Thereby,
the continuous shifts from the map to the ground and back that
were required to amend the Google Earth-picture confronted us
with the benefits, but also the limitations of mapping. Depending
on the perspective, a satellite image reveals overwhelmingly much,
or very little of Karail Basti. You are astonished by the density of
dwellings only to find out, once you are at someone's home for a tea,
that the single housing units are subdivided into even smaller rooms
and lent to respective sub-tenants: one family, one room – this is the
standard. You are proud you've located each and every mosque only
to be asked why you haven't recorded the trees, palms and especially
the banyan trees, on whose branches benign as well as malign spirits dwell, as the local residents say. You get familiar with the whole
basti to realise when returning after six months that your favourite
spot, the overall fabric of a particular area, and even the population
structure, have changed considerably due to the replacement of tin
structures with brick buildings.4 In other words, the plural views
on what the map ought to show and the steady transformations
we came across thanks to the personal interactions and the longue
durée-approach of our study (we'd chosen to cover at least ten years
of developments in the settlement) presented us with a dilemma:
We would either have to make our map more general and abstract
or accept that it may become outdated in no time.
In spite of this probably well-known limitation we could see
some of our main goals coming to fulfilment. Variations of the

Information Overload

287

main map helped us to tackle increasingly complex questions related to spatial development with individuals and groups of residents; moreover, from time to time, Karail's community-based
organisation (CBO) leaders used them in their ongoing struggle
for recognition and legalisation of the basti. It was during a meeting with them, back in 2012, that we discovered their samajer manchitra, community maps (see first map at the end of the article).
One of the main differences between NGOs that pursue a rather
emancipatory programme and those that simply distribute aid is
that the first encourage community-based organisation among
members of the disadvantaged social groups. The activists of DSK,
a prominent representative of this kind of NGOs in Bangladesh,5
are trained to turn development projects, generally focused on
infrastructural upgrading, into occasions to collaborate with the
inhabitants, foster their networking and thus "help them to help
themselves". This somewhat inflationary slogan, taken seriously,
means that the aim of an NGO should be to make itself unnecessary in the long run if not sooner. It will accompany the concerned
groups in the process of detecting their own needs and forging
coalitions so that they become able to carry out projects and campaigns by and for themselves. Mapping together facilitates such a
process, as shared problems are identified and possible solutions
emerge "naturally", by means of comparison, and from an occupation with space that conflates its physical and social factors in the
drawing. It stood out that the CBO leaders had been producing
one or two community maps per year since 2009, initially under
the guidance of DSK activists, later independently, and that the
regular exercise had increased not only their understanding of

288

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection

technical and infrastructural requirements, but also their sense
of "ownership" of the settlement. They also performed regular
countings of the population: That their census' results matched
with our own estimates was all the more important, as most statistics circulated by the state, but also by NGOs and international
agencies, are strongly flawed.6
So, now we knew that Karail's inhabitants, and in particular
its CBO leaders, were able to produce and use maps in order to
plan and execute localised development interventions. This gave
us one more reason to try and push our mapping practice to a new
level, experimenting with personalised expression forms and mixing the geographic logic with other logics. The inhabitants' community maps acted as an inspiring model for this endeavour: They
were highly synthetic yet innumerable stories emanated from
them nonetheless. We reckoned this had to do with their collective
and manual generation and with an approach that didn't at all pretend to explain or reduce the complexity of relations and relationships, structures and negotiations so deeply entrenched in Karail's
everyday life. Similarly, our interpretation ought to pass on this
information poetically and function poietically, that is, trigger an
ideally infinite generation and regeneration of observations according to changing perspectives. In short, the samajer manchitra

compelled us to turn mapping into (a way of) storytelling. This
is the radical lesson our Information Overload map entails: Stop
counting; start talking with the inhabitants of a place. Do it excessively. And while searching for words to name what your ears
resonate of, what you've got before your eyes and what your memory and body won't ever forget, you'll notice the place is already
speaking to you with its own voice.
"And, what about the wall?", you will ask now. The wall, a
symbol of how the powerful would like to regiment space in a
city whose population growth is tagged the fastest of the world
and where land prices are constantly rising, has been standing
between Karail and T&T Colony until today. It is our hope that,
also looking at this ridiculously thin line on the map, people on
both sides will soon dismiss their fear of distinctions, such as "legal-illegal", forged only in order to retain the status quo in a city
deserting its duty to cater to all inhabitants, and jointly demand a
fair redistribution of living space.

Endnotes
1. Text by Elisa T. Bertuzzo, Photos by Günter Nest
2. Ours is a no-budget study that runs thanks to each participant’s personal and political commitment, scientific passion and friendship. The local
teams were built by Louisa Scherer, Paul Klever, Farhana Kaniz Sharna
(2012), Abdul Kader Khan (Komol), Anna Sauter (2013), Marian Knop,
Lisa Lampe, Tamanna Siddiqui (2014), and guided by Günter Nest and
Elisa T. Bertuzzo.
3. Cf. habitat-forum-berlin.de/page/adda-discourses.html
4. Building with bricks instead of corrugated iron makes it easier to pile,
onto the ground floors, mezzanines and first floors. Whereas the mezzanines are generally allotted to single men, especially cycle-rickshaw pullers
and construction workers, the tiny rooms on the first floors are being
increasingly rented out to students, young couples and professionals.
5. Acronym for Dushtha Shashtya Kendra, dskbangladesh.org. Habitat
Forum Berlin has collaborated with this organisation since 2014.
6. In particular, the government’s census downsizes the population of Karail
and other basti, whereas most NGOs (local and international) and
donor agencies tend to overestimate the numbers, clearly to cater to
respective agendas.
Illustrations
The map INFORMATION OVERLOAD – From the Map to the Ground and
Back was created by Günter Nest, Marcus Jeutner, Paul Klever, Anna Sauter,
Louisa Scherer, and Elisa T. Bertuzzo.
The reproduced community map from 2013 was drawn by Mohiuddin with
inputs from Selina, Md. Mannan and Shahid Gazi.

Information Overload

289

C/Artographies of Positionality

Or How We Try to Situate Ourselves as a Working Group in Academia

Working Group Critical Geographies of Global Inequalities, University of Hamburg

294

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection

“This is a map! Is it? It's a drawing! Is it really a map? It is!”

Welcome Confusion!

Confusion helps us to get our thoughts, emotions and boundaries
moving and opens spaces for discussions and reflections on multiple levels. Being engaged as scholars in a neoliberalizing academy,
we participate in the production and distribution of knowledge by
writing articles about other people's lives, by researching (in) the
global south, by giving talks, etc., on a regular basis. These practices generate a lot of confusion and challenges. As an academic
working group under the label "Critical Geographies of Global
Inequalities" (CGGI) we collectively decided on welcoming these
processes of confusion. Inspired by joint readings and discussions
of works on feminist slow scholarship (Mountz et al., 2015), decolonizing methodologies (Smith 2012), cultivating practices of
joy (Kern et al., 2014) and wellbeing within academia (Mullings et
al., 2016), we began to deal with questions around power relations
and knowledge production and how we as a working group are situated within these, but also how we position ourselves to these.

Art Meets Cartography – Artography?

While trying to reflect on our own theoretical and methodological research practices individually and at the same time wanting
to develop a stance as a collective, we quickly reached the limits of
the conventional range of scientific practices. We realized that at
this point thinking, discussing, and writing as our standard tools
to acquire new perspectives on different themes was not enough
for us. This is why we started to include creative and visual elements into our reflection processes. It became clear that engaging
creatively with our own work also made it possible to deal with
complex subject-related issues as well as theoretical questions and
methodological approaches simultaneously on one piece of paper.
In collaboration with Neele Bunjes1 – a Hamburg-based artist and
illustrator – we started a collective artistic mapping process based
on the interdependencies of art and scientific knowledge production. Moving between the steps of reflection, imagination, visualization, representation and discussion over and over again, this
map represents the current intermediate result of our discussion,
which is part of the ongoing negotiation of our positionalities as
well. It is therefore neither fixed nor final.
Within our working group we have multiple interests and positionalities. Subsequently we need to negotiate between different
regional foci, subject matters and methodological approaches. Furthermore, our theoretical perspectives range from political ecology,
poststructuralism, integrative geographies, global urban research
to decolonial feminism, to name just a few. In order to accommodate these multiple aspects, the map is illustrated in a style of
"hidden objects games". The different puzzle pieces represent this
diversity on different layers; all the pieces of the puzzle are related
through methodological tools, theoretical perspectives, subject-related aspects, etc., thus creating one whole picture and putting "us"
in place. Without going into detail of the illustrated elements, we
want to briefly highlight three dimensions of representation and
their role in mapping our working group's positionalities.

Putting Our Cards on the Table
Table
The background of the illustration shows the surface of a table.
What you cannot see is that this table is located in an office in a
German university building surrounded and used by a mainly
white, privileged group of academics. This table is not any table but the central meeting point of our working group. Sitting
around this table, we work, chat, discuss, have coffee or tea (hence
the cups), share ideas, laugh and cry. Thus, it is us looking at the
table but at the same time we are also part of the picture in which
we find ourselves visualized and (re)presented – e.g. at the speaker's desk or in the figure that is drawn by someone and simultaneously about to draw itself while still reflecting on its own drawers
in the head. What is on the surface is therefore the result of multiple power relations around that table, negotiating, among other
things, categories of power differences, positions in academia and
the limits of reflection(s).
Topics
The visual elements on the surface represent selected topics that
we consider relevant for the map. The different subject-related
puzzle pieces highlight collective interests within the working
group, such as different forms of knowledge production, impact
of power relations or inequalities and resistance. However, it is
not only about what actually comes up but also about how these
topics are being represented from our perspective as European
academics and put into context visually within the map. Who
speaks, who acts, what does a scientist look like, how can we visualize othering processes without reproducing visual stereotypes?
How do you depict water as a society-nature relation? And so on.
Tools
The presence of tools like the needle, the pen and the rubber illustrate the working group's active role in defining and framing
contents within knowledge production by also questioning them
at the same time. On the one hand, we "stitch" together perspectives and topics while, on the other hand, it may involve drawing
lines or making them invisible. Different theoretical perspectives
(glasses) highlight certain aspects more than others, and different scales (magnifying glasses) remind us of (hi)stories which
are inscribed into our bodies and thus shape our positionalities as
researchers and as individuals. These tools help to point out and
to reflect on the researchers' impact in the making and unmaking
(masking and unmasking) of knowledge.

C/Artographies of Positionality

295

Negotiating Positionality Visually

Mapping our working group involved and still involves a profound
reflection of our individual and collective practices of doing geography. Presenting ourselves as a collective to others through this
map can be understood as an effort to withstand current tendencies of individualization in science (my "Hirsch-Index" is bigger
than yours!). It is also an attempt to follow calls for the decolonization of knowledge production. We consider taking the time to
reflect and rethink our own entanglements within power relations
in the academic universe as a first essential step within this process.
The creative approach to the negotiation process enhanced our
ability for reflection. The visualization not only provided space for
connecting different forms of knowledge (e.g. embodied, creative,
theoretical, etc.), it also revealed prejudiced hidden mechanisms
of imagination that affected our representations of things, people and beings. Setting out to create a critically engaged, reflexive, multifaceted map of our working group, it turned out that our
imagination was not so diverse after all. An early version of our
visualization of all persons pictured on the map represented a heteronormative society as white, adult, able-bodied, although in reality we work with all different kinds of people. Representations
of diversity only became a question through the process of visualization itself. It revealed stereotypes in knowledge production
as, for example, people of color were placed within "indigenous
knowledge" while the scientist was depicted as an old white man
giving lectures. Since this kind of visualization represents dominant global inequalities and hierarchical structures in academia,
this could also be read as a critique, but at the same time it runs the
danger of reproducing these power relations we actually want to
overcome.
Bringing collective cartography and art together in a positionality-map allowed us to present different dimensions of negotiation on an equal level without prioritizing theory over subject and
practice over reflection or vice versa. Processes of visualization
called for a more careful engagement with knowledge production
and imagination. Yet, the map is open for discussion and different readings for everyone, full of ambiguities and incomplete in
its meanings. Every time we look at it, something else comes to the
fore and demands interpretation and explanation. Every time the
answer is a different one for each of us, since we and our positionalities are not fixed and our ability to reflect will hopefully grow.
So, yes, it is a map, perhaps not in a conventional geographic sense
but in an ideally (non-)materialistic and relational way, and yes,
we are still confused.

296

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection

Endnotes
1. neele-bunjes.de
References
Kern, L., Hawkins, R., Falconer Al-Hindi, K. & Moss, P. 2014. A Collective
Biography of Joy in Academic Practice. Social & Cultural Geography, 15(7):
834–851.
Mountz, A., Bonds, A., Mansfield, B., Loyd, J., Hyndman, J., Walton-Roberts, M.,
Basu, R., Whitson, R., Hawkins, R., Hamilton, T. & Curran, W. 2015. For
Slow Scholarship: A Feminist Politics of Resistance through Collective
Action in the Neoliberal University. ACME: An International Journal for
Critical Geographies, 14(4): 1235–1259.
Mullings, B., Peake, L. & Parizeau, K. 2016. Cultivating an Ethic of Wellness in
Geography. The Canadian Geographer, 60(2): 161–167.
Smith, L.T. 2012. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples.
Second edition. New York: Zed Books.

C/Artographies of Positionality

297

299

Deep Maps
Brett Bloom
breakdownbreakdown.net

300

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection

Making a Deep Map is a way to be conscious of a place in such a
manner as to hold multiple layers of understanding of the present
moment in a non-reductive and robust manner. This is in contradistinction to the ways we normally speed through and consume
the landscapes and places of our petroleum-driven, industrialized
lives, and the related sense of self this produces. A Deep Map of a
place includes many things: direct perceptions of that place; its inhabitants' memories; embodied understandings as the place enters
you in numerous ways that are emotional, psychological, physical, spiritual and transcendental; geological formations; morethan-human actors like animals, plants, microbes and landscapes;
historical developments from different eras; weather patterns;
agricultural uses; modern infrastructure; bioregional processes;
contradictory ideological ratiocinations and more. A Deep Mapping of a place potentially has no limits to complexity as long as it
is meaningful and you have – or a group has – the ability to hold an
awareness of the varying ways of understanding. The layers can be
added as long as this helps elucidate and makes present a complex
way of relating. This short text describes where the idea of a Deep
Map comes from and how it can be developed further and applied
as a methodology in direct social and spatial encounters.
The idea of a Deep Map, as an emergent method – and cultural
formation – for thinking the world in terms and ways that work
to eliminate petro-subjective positions,1 was directly inspired by
William Least Heat-Moon's book PrairyErth: A Deep Map (1999).
In the book, he describes borrowing the ethnographers' process of
"thick description." This concept was introduced by anthropologist Clifford Gertz in his book The Interpretation of Cultures (1973).
A thick description enumerates a culture and its behaviors while it
simultaneously gives a dense context so that the behavior becomes
understandable to those not a part of the culture being described.
Least Heat Moon's use of Deep Mapping takes on a powerful literary approach to understanding a place. PrairyErth tells the story
of several counties in Kansas that once thrived but are now in severe decline with few denizens. Least Heat Moon creates incredibly dense contexts for telling the stories of the current inhabitants
and what might motivate them to stay as things continue to decline
and the world changes around them. Least Heat Moon starts each
exploration of the various Kansas counties he covers in PrairyErth
with a bevy of quotes. He takes them from historical records, daily newspapers, poems, philosophy books and many other sources
from the local culture as readily as elsewhere. These quotations
begin to sensitize you to the many things he will be talking about
on the pages that follow immediately after. In presenting you with
a particular place, he might describe important geological formations, then move on to how the indigenous people used the land,
their displacement by settlers, the fast industrialization of the
place, and then the decline of the modern economy, which sets
the stage to meet people who have stayed in towns that are mostly
vacant and falling apart. The book is a dazzling achievement that
makes the stories of these places thrive and become tangible, almost a shared reality with the people he talks to.

How to Inhabit a Deep Map

I am an artist and activist and am interested in how I can make cultural tools that help shift us out of one way of being in the world
into another that is less violent and destructive, which can help us
survive climate breakdown and chaos. Instead of making art that
you look at, I make work that you experience directly in a cultural
way, very much like you would if you went to a concert where you
were asked to sing and clap along the entire time. Your presence
and your expression of yourself are critical to the success of the
gathering. I have 20 years of experience working as an artist in
groups and making art collaboratively. This has given me a lot of
experience in facilitating all kinds of group processes to amplify
the subjects explored.
I use Deep Mapping as a cultural tool that can help shift our behavior and allow us to experience what it might be like to have petroleum out of our sense of self and the kinds of social formation
we nurture. Least Heat Moon makes Deep Maps with writing; I
have borrowed this notion to carefully craft immersive experiences to be shared and gone through with others. They have been
organized and realized with the explicit purpose of practicing the
de-industrialization of our individual and collective sense of self,
to begin to understand what post-oil subjectivity might be. I have
organized long camps and workshops where a Deep Map is created for people to enter.
Inhabiting a Deep Map is a social process, a pedagogical tool,
and a way of tuning yourself to the complexities of being in any
place. I work to convey a strong sense to the people who join the
camps and workshops that they will be experiencing the given
place we are in in a way that differs dramatically from petroleum-based space and time, which flattens places and our experiences of them.
In the summer of 2015, I co-organized a camp in rural Scotland
that focused on the dramatic landscape that surrounded the Scottish Sculpture Workshop (SSW), the venue that hosted the gathering. This landscape is heavily industrialized yet maintains a beauty
and mystery that gives one a sense that it could be restored and understood in radically other ways. The camp lasted 11 days. Around
30 people attended. We engaged where we were with directly embodied learning processes. We used exercises that come from a variety of sources. One source that is used frequently is Deep Listening. It is a practice developed by the American composer and
electronic music pioneer, Pauline Oliveros, to train ourselves to use
our vast perceptual capacities to sense sounds, energy flows, and
ancient rhythms in ourselves and the world. A simple beginner's
exercise – that has many similarities to meditation, but is directed
towards the outside world and not one's inner peace – is to sit and
listen for 30 minutes to all the sounds one hears moving from the
global (hearing everything at once) to the focal (listening to a specific sound until it stops). The results are always quite surprising.
Thirty people listening all to the same sonic environment in this
way will each come up with very different understandings of what
it is they heard. It becomes immediately clear that the wildness of
existence is just on the other side of a very permeable threshold!
We combined these exercises with discussions about climate
breakdown and our fears about the future. We read and discussed
texts that sensitized us to various issues like animistic knowledge
and how to regain the powerful tools of sensing the world that we

Deep Maps

301

After many days of being constantly immersed in these kinds of
experiences, a relatively strong group cohesion emerged for most
people as did an alternate sense of place and time. This was not
just my own perception but something that was communicated
to me directly or in passing when I overhead others making statements that revealed this, particularly about their shifted sense of
time. This has been an organic part of all the Deep Map situations
I have organized. Each group arrives at this state at a different moment, but they do get there and the Deep Map is an important part
of this.

Extending Deep Mapping

have evolved with but suppress with regular calls to being rational
about everything. We had guests come and talk about a variety of
subjects that included land reform, soil and spirituality, re-inhabiting rural Scotland via the tradition of hutting, and more. We had
workshops where we walked, with ecologist Nance Klehm, around
the small town where SSW is located and learned empathic tools
for understanding plants and their characters in addition to the medicinal properties of these plants that were growing in the cracks of
sidewalks and in alley ways. Another workshop, led by soil scientist Bruce Ball, had us looking at soil samples everyone was asked
to bring from their homes so we could understand how the soil
worked and how to gauge its relative health. We made excursions to
a nearby permacultural farm. We took a longer trip to an enormous
rewilding initiative on 10,000 hectares by an organization rewilding the Scottish landscape – Trees For Life is restoring the Caledonian forest on a former estate where overgrazing and hunting for
many generations had destroyed much of what had been there.
We had a sauna made so people could relax after the long 12hour days of activities (see image on opposite page). The interior
was made from locally harvested larch, and the rocks that sat on
the wood-burning stove came from streams, fields and the hills
surrounding SSW. The exterior was made from old whiskey barrels and had an amazing smell every time it rained. The sauna was
used by artist Mari Keski-Korsu to do whisking and heat balancing
for those who wanted it. This is an ancient Baltic healing tradition
that she is trained in. Keski-Korsu made whisks from various trees
that were in the hills surrounding SSW. A typical session went like
this: You would sit in the sauna with Mari for 30 minutes, exit and
cool down a bit, then reenter after she rinsed you with birch water.
You would lie naked and face down on a pillow of aromatic leaves.
Mari would then whisk your body, swirl heat from the top of the
sauna down over your body and then massage parts of your body
with the tree branches. Next you would turn over. A hot bunch of
leaves put on your genitals. More clumps of hot aromatic leaves
put over your face. And even more put under your arm pits as Mari
continued to move the hot air over your body, beat the soles of
your feet, and literally melt your consciousness into a completely other place. Keski-Korsu also introduced the group to animal
communication via a workshop with Clydesdale horses, which
were used for centuries to work the landscape.

302

Counter-Cartographies as Self-Reflection

Permacultural resource mapping, developed by the late Bill Mollison and others, can be used to help visualize aspects of a Deep
Map. These processes are highly compatible and are very powerful
when combined. I am constantly inspired by illustrations from the
Permaculture: A Designers' Manual, by Bill Mollison (1988), in
particular two maps that show the production of a single chicken
egg. One shows an industrial egg and all the resources that go into
making it, complete with all the energy-intensive and wasteful
processes like the burning of fossil fuels to make many of the materials needed to house, feed and transport eggs laid by the chickens.
This map is contrasted with another that shows a permacultural
egg and how its making dramatically reduces the wasteful and polluting energy inputs needed by creating things like self-generating
food sources that feed the chicken as the chicken's waste feeds it,
and so on.
The image above demonstrates how I have used permacultural resource mapping. Material like this map is used in the gatherings I
organize. This particular map is of an individual's Petro-Subjectivity; it presents many potential intersections in one's life with oil
and its presence in every imaginable process and action. Making
maps like these are useful to help think about how you would go
about organizing your own Deep Map experience.

Instructions for Making a Deep Map

Making a Deep Map takes a significant amount of time to organize and construct. It requires a commitment of resources, finding collaborators and creating a situation where one is a facilitator
among other facilitators. Everyone involved in some way becomes
a co-creator of meaning and experience. The Deep Map enables
an experience where no one person, discourse, or narrative holds
power over an understanding of the things you are investigating.
They are combined, piled up and co-exist even when they seem to
be contradictory. The Deep Map gives participants immediate, directly embodied participation in the subjects and leaves them with
an understanding that is not possible otherwise.
1.

Start by organizing an extended, immersive gathering – like
a camp2 – where there is a lot of time to explore a specific set
of concerns from multiple perspectives. The gathering can
be for a 3-day weekend or much longer. This can happen in
a city and is an option which deserves experimenting with.
However, a rural location makes for greater group cohesion

and concentration as people will be taken away from the
stresses and demands of their urban lives.3
2.

Explore topics in several different, overlapping, layered
ways. Make space for people who use multiple, and contradictory, kinds of "languages" for understanding the world, for
example: academic, activist, spiritual, myth-telling, empathic, visionary, scientific or any combination of these.

3.

Explore topics through multiple kinds of activities: lectures,
directly embodied learning, walks, discussions, readings,
hands-on workshops, team-building exercises, interspecies
communication and more to address your set of concerns.

4.

Have your activities unfold in a variety of settings. You can
have multiple discussions, for example, but try different
social formations to do this: formal presentations in a circle,
a loose gathering around a bonfire at night with food and
drinks, on top of a high-rise building, a moderated discussion on spectrum,4 plus many more ways.

5.

Take care to provide a thoughtful blend of variation and
repetition. It is good to have too much happening, so there
is this feeling of being overwhelmed, but make sure it is in a
positive way. Give people the freedom and feeling that they
can opt out of things if they become overwhelmed. Reassure
them that there is no judgement if they need to take a break
and take care of themselves.

6.

Take excursions to visit people, initiatives, landscapes or
anything else that offers yet another perspective or way of
considering what it is you are exploring. This puts people
into an additional dynamic situation that you have not organized but that will only amplify your other activities.

7.

Figure out the economics of the Deep Map gathering. This
is relative to the ambition and scale of what you want to organize. Deep Maps can work with grants where people have
only to pay for a little bit of the gathering, or maybe you have
to ask people to cover all the costs of transportation, food,
speaker fees, workshops, etc. Keep it affordable for participants if you can.

8.

Decide who you want to invite to your Deep Map. This
will effect what you organize and the kind of experience
you have. You can have an open call and accept anyone who
answers the fastest. You can have folks answer questions
that show their level of engagement with the subjects you are
exploring and then make a curated selection. Perhaps you
develop a different strategy to bring people in, but it is good
to give this aspect of organizing a Deep Map enough consideration.

9.

Make Deep Map guidelines.5 They can be as minimal or as
detailed as your gathering requires, but should be used to
help strengthen and support the success of the Deep Map.

Endnotes
1. Petro-subjectivity is something that each of us experiences constantly.
It is a sense of self and the world that shapes who we are and how
we think. It stems in part from the fact that the use of oil is present in
everything we do. It has shaped the concepts that govern our thinking.
Our use of language and the basic concepts that structure our existence
are breathed through the logic of oil relationships and form the metaphoric universe we bathe ourselves in when we speak to one another
about who we are, what we do and what the world around us consists
of. From Petro-Subjectivity: De-Industrializing Our Sense of Self, by Brett
Bloom, Breakdown Break Down Press, 2015.
2. A great resource for understanding the history and forms of camps and
their potentials for being used in a variety of capacities, for making Deep
Maps and other things, is Charlie Hailey’s Camps: A Guide to 21st-Century
Space, MIT Press, 2009.
3. Commuting restraints were so severe in London that it cut a lot of
time off of when we could start and end our days together. In Helsinki,
people were distracted by the proximity to their “urban busyness” – the
fear that they might be missing out on something else – and it effected
the cohesion of the group.
4. This is a specific kind of discussion used by activists to visualize the
various positions people represent in a debate. In the space where
you are holding your discussion, you designate two extreme positions
in a debate and give them a physical location, perhaps by marking the
spaces with chairs. You ask people participating to locate themselves at
or between these two points. The discussion is facilitated and draws out
the differences as a way to discuss the issues.
5. An example of Deep Map (Camp) Guidelines:
•
This is a place of respect for differences in race, ethnicity, gender,
sexuality, religion, ideology, temperament, pace, ability, introversion
and extroversion.
•
We practice discourse diversity, in the sense of biodiversity, and
the necessarily complex set of experiences, cultures, education, and
so on that shape each of us.
•
We have respect and awareness for the non-human participants in
the camp at the site and anywhere we may go.
•
We work together to make this a safe space for you and for anyone at the camp. It is important to take care of yourself, to make
sure you are healthy, and that you are not stressed out by anything
at the camp. Take time away if you need to from group situations
and processes. Ask for help should you need it.
•
This is a place for constructive, generous criticism, reflection, and
pushing each other to learn and understand in an intense yet
nurturing manner.
References
Bloom, B.A. 2015. Petro-Subjectivity: De-Industrializing Our Sense of Self.
academia.edu/18494906/Petro-Subjectivity_De-Industrializing_Our_
Sense_of_Self, 14 January 2018.
Hailey, C. 2009. Camps: A Guide to 21st-Century Space. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

Deep Maps

303

304

305

Counter-Cartographies
as Critique

Uneven Digital Geographies
… and Why They Matter

Mark Graham, Stefano De Sabbata, Ralph Straumann, Sanna Ojanperä
geonet.oii.ox.ac.uk

308

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

Information has always been spatial. It is produced somewhere;
it is used somewhere; it moves between places (Graham et al.,
2015a). And the geographies of information have always been imbricated in power relationships. Some people have far more control over it than others, and some places are central in information
ecosystems whilst others are peripheral.
For instance, the map Top 400 Universities (see opposite page)
shows the locations of the world's top 400 universities as ranked
by the Times Higher Education. It also illustrates the relative
wealth of the country that hosts each university. There are no universities from low-income countries present on the list, and India
is also the only lower-middle income country represented, being
home to five of the world's top-400 ranked universities. Most of
the world's elite universities are in the Global North, most of the
world's published academic knowledge is produced in the Global North, and even acceptance rates for most journals tend to be
higher for authors from the Global North. Amazingly, the Greater
London cluster alone contains the same number of top-400 universities as all of Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and Latin
America combined! We have a state of affairs where the Global
North has tended to be a producer of knowledge and the Global
South has tended to be a consumer of it.

Relatedly, the maps Submission by Country… and Acceptance Rate
by Country ... (Graham, 2015) were created from some submission
data that SAGE journals shared with us. Amongst other things, the
data tell us where authors of articles come from and the primary
discipline of the journal they are submitting to.
We see much more academic content coming from the Global
North than from the Global South. Africa in particular is notable
for its absence. Most countries on the continent fail to register
even a single journal article submission. Not only do a lot of countries in the South have a particularly low number of submissions,
they also have very low acceptance rates for the small numbers of
submissions that they do have, further deepening the geographic
divides in knowledge production.
However, many have pointed to the internet as a way of transcending some of these traditional constraints. Access to the internet, in theory, allows users to access the sum of all codified
human knowledge; it allows people to participate in a more level
playing field. This is because there are relatively few geographic
barriers to the information flow over the internet. With a few exceptions (notably China and a few other authoritarian regimes),
content like a Wikipedia page or Google Book is equally accessible
to anyone on Earth.

Uneven Digital Geographies

309

310

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

But it is worth remembering that the internet, and information within it, is also characterised by real geographic inequalities. A majority
of humanity has still never used the internet, and some parts of the
world have very little representation in our digital world.
But, even with those imbalances in mind, it is worth remembering that there are about four billion internet users in the world.
All of those people can potentially contribute to the wealth of information that we all share and use on the internet. The problem
is that they don't.

Digital Participation

We can look at one of the world's biggest and best-known hosting
services for software development projects, for instance: GitHub.
The shading of the map Github | Mapping collaborative Software
(see opposite page top) illustrates the number of GitHub users as
a proportion of each country's internet population. The circular
charts surrounding the two hemispheres depict the total number
of GitHub users (left) and commits (right) per country.
North America and Europe each account for about one third of
the total number of GitHub users. The Middle East, North Africa,
and Sub-Saharan Africa together represent less than 1% of GitHub
users, and just about 1% of commits. Switzerland alone counts almost
as many GitHub users as the Middle East and North Africa region,
and more than Sub-Saharan Africa. The geography of digital engagement in this facet of the "knowledge economy" is thus starkly uneven.
Wikipedia is another useful example of a platform that in
theory allows anyone in the world to submit information to it. In
practice, though, we also see massive inequalities in the amount of
content submitted to Wikipedia from different parts of the world.
The vast majority of Wikipedia is written by people in the Global
North, and only a tiny amount of content comes from people in
the South (see Graham et al., 2016, for more on the topic). This
matters because editors from the North can easily overpower editors from the South when writing about contested topics.
The Middle East is perhaps the part of the world where we see
these divides most starkly manifested. There are almost as many
edits that come from Israel as from the entire rest of the region
combined: from Morocco in the West to Iran in the East (Graham,
2012). Thus people in just a few parts of the world seem to have
much more voice than everyone else (see Ojanperä et al., 2017 for
more on this topic).

Digital Representation

Not only are some parts of the world left out of practices of digital
participation, some parts of the world are also covered by much
thinner augmentations of information than others. These layers of information help to comprise and define a place: It is thus
important to understand not just where they come from but also
where they represent.
The map Content Density in OpenStreetMap (see opposite
page bottom) shows the location of edited content in the world's
largest collaborative mapping project: OpenStreetMap. In OpenStreetMap, high-income OEDC countries are home to about 80%
of the submitted content. We thus end up with comparisons like
the fact that Egypt accounts for as many nodes as Iceland, despite
being 10 times as big and being home to 250 times the population.
We can see similar uneven geographies of digital representation if we look at GeoNames (see following page), which is the
world's largest freely available gazetteer (i.e., a dictionary of geographic place names). The pixel colours represent the number of
names referring to a geographic place per spatial unit: a square of a
one tenth degree of latitude and one tenth degree of longitude (see
Graham & De Sabbata, 2015 for more on the method).
The US accounts for slightly more than a quarter of the database. There is actually more content created about the US than all
of Asia combined (Asia accounts for only about 23% of geographic
content, despite being home to over half the world's population). Interestingly, the information presences that we see are characterized
by unusual patterns. Not only do we see the usual suspects of Western Europe and the United States with large amounts of geographic
information, but we also see significant densities in places like Sri
Lanka, Iran, and Nepal. By defining structured geographic information about the world, gazetteers ultimately have the power to shape
and structure how geographic meaning is made. The presences and
absences of data within shape how the world is digitally re-made.
Finally, it is worth exploring the geography of content in Wikipedia. The map The Geographical Uneven Coverage of Wikipedia, presented on the double page, points out the highly uneven
spatial distribution of (geotagged) Wikipedia articles in 44 language versions of the encyclopaedia. Slightly more than half of
the global total of 3,336,473 articles are about places, events and
people inside the red circle on the map, occupying only about 2.5%
of the world's land area (see Graham et al., 2014, for more on this
research). Much like GeoNames or OpenStreetMap, Wikipedia
plays an important role in shaping how we understand the world.
The geography of content within it, therefore matters immensely.

Uneven Digital Geographies

311

312

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

Information Geographies
and the Geographies of Information

It is worth remembering that the geography of information production has always been characterised by significant geographic
biases. But the fact that billions of people are now connected to
the internet was seen by many as a moment of change. The internet has been described as a "leveller" and a "democratiser" (c.f.
Graham et al., 2015) – allowing anyone to access what Wikipedia
refers to as "the sum of all human knowledge"; allowing anyone
to contribute. If users in Manchester, Mombasa, and Mumbai are
connected, there should be no difference in their propensity to access and created digital knowledge, right?
In practice, we see a very different world from that vision. A
world in which some places are far more visible than others. A
world in which people in some parts of the world have a much bigger say in how our digital environments are constructed (see also
Graham, 2015b).
Let's remember that the places we live in are increasingly digital. Our cities are no longer just made of bricks, mortar, glass and
steel. They are also made of data (Graham, 2013; Graham et al.,
2013).
As such, it will continue to be hugely important to interrogate
the digital layers of places. Where are they? What are they? What
dos and don'ts, they exclude? Who constructs them and who is
sidelined? And who controls them (Shaw & Graham, 2017)? These
are the questions that we need to be asking if we ultimately want to
work towards less uneven and more just information geographies.

References
Graham, M. 2012. Mapping Edits to Wikipedia from the Middle East and
North Africa. markgraham.space/blog/mapping-edits-to-wikipedia-fromthe-middle-east, 13 January 2018.
Graham, M. 2013. Geography/Internet: Ethereal Alternate Dimensions of Cyberspace or Grounded Augmented Realities? The Geographical Journal,
178(2): 177–182.
Graham, M., Hogan, B., Straumann, R.K. & Medhat, A. 2014. Uneven Geographies of User-Generated Information: Patterns of Increasing Informational Poverty. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 104(4):
746–764.
Graham, M., Zook, M. & Boulton, A. 2013. Augmented Reality in Urban Places:
Contested Content and the Duplicity of Code. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 38(3): 464–479.
Graham, M. 2015a. The Geography of Academic Knowledge. geonet.oii.ox.ac.
uk/blog/the-geography-of-academic-knowledge, 13 January 2018.
Graham, M. 2015b. Information Geographies and Geographies of Information.
New Geographies, 7: 159–166.
Graham, M. & De Sabbata, S. 2015. Mapping Information Wealth and Poverty:
The Geography of Gazetteers. Environment and Planning A: Economy and
Space, 47(6): 1254–1264.
Graham, M., Andersen, C. & Mann, L. 2015. Geographical Imagination and
Technological Connectivity in East Africa. Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers, 40(3): 334–349.
Graham, M., De Sabbata, S. & Zook, M.A. 2015. Towards a Study of Information Geographies: (Im)Mutable Augmentations and a Mapping of
the Geographies of Information. Geo: Geography and Environment, 2(1):
88–105.
Graham, M., Straumann, R.K. & Hogan, B. 2016. Digital Divisions of Labor and
Informational Magnetism: Mapping Participation in Wikipedia. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers, 105(6): 1158–1178.
Ojanperä, S., Graham, M., Straumann, R.K., De Sabbata, S. & Zook, M. 2017.
Engagement in the Knowledge Economy: Regional Patterns of Content
Creation with a Focus on Sub-Saharan Africa. Information Technologies &
International Development, 13: 33–51.
Shaw, J. & Graham, M. 2017. An Informational Right to the City? Code,
Content, Control, and the Urbanization of Information. Antipode, 49(4):
907–927.

Uneven Digital Geographies

313

314

From Data Commons to (Critical) Cartography
Linking Data Sources for a Gender Street Map of Vienna

Florian Ledermann
genderatlas.at

316

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

Creating a map can be an effective strategy to challenge established representations of reality. However, for many critical cartography projects, initial ideas of what should be made visible on
the map are quickly followed by the sobering insight that suitable
data is often simply not available. Even when we would be willing to pay for the data or work with commercial or governmental
institutions to get access to data, we may find the specific market-driven or governance-centered view of these actors shapes the
data that is collected and released in the first place and therefore
available for map-making projects.
For the genderATlas project, we faced the challenge that while a
lot of statistical data on various aspects of the representation and
opportunities for women is collected by official statistical bodies,
the granularity of those data is usually limited to the level of administrative units, such as counties and municipalities, restricting
any cartographic project using the data to reproducing this predominant way of structuring space according to the established
hierarchy of political administration. For any more fine-grained
analysis, such as the reflection of the representation of women in
public space on an urban scale, we would be on our own – extensive spatial data sets on the issue of gender equality are simply not
available on a fine-grained scale in Austria.
To allow us to produce a map for the topic of gender representation in urban public space, we developed an approach of working
with data commons that are not by themselves concerned with
the topic (like Wikipedia or OpenStreetMap), but allow us to link
those sources together and build upon them. In the process, we
would contribute to the commons in the form of corrections and
additions, as identified by the needs of our project. By "standing
on the shoulders of giants", we could leverage the precision and
extensiveness of these community-driven initiatives to support
our critical mapping project.

Data Scraping

As of January 2016, Vienna has 6,842 streets and squares. The topic of fair representation of women in street names is well known
and publically debated in Vienna, but no comprehensive publically available data source exists that would allow detailed analysis or
visualization. Also in the realm of data commons, a data set with
the required information was not available.
Wikipedia provides a comprehensive list of street names for Vienna, separated by district, which is well maintained and includes
a short comment on the origin of the name.1 These comments
include the name of the person the street is named after, but not
their gender in an explicit format. In a first step, we constructed a
computer-processable list of street names and their "base names"
(the entity the street is named after) by scraping the data from
Wikipedia, using a Python script. Errors that occurred during the
data scraping (e.g. due to inconsistent formatting of the list) were
fixed directly in Wikipedia, thereby contributing to an improved
data common.
The (False) Promise of Total Automation
The second data commons we used was a free list of first names
and their gender assignment.2 An initial attempt to assign gender
information to the base names automatically through a script by
simply looking up the first word (assumed first name) on the list
of names failed – only about 19% of streets were assigned a base
name that could be linked to a specific gender (15.1% male and 3.6%
female). However, this process gave us a starting point for subsequent manual processing.
In this manual data processing step, all street names, the automatically assigned gender information and the comments from Wikipedia were exported to a spreadsheet and edited manually. This
took approximately two full working days and resulted in a reliable source of information for the analysis. It showed that 57.4%
of the streets were named after a male person and only 5.2% after a female person (a factor of 1:11). Interestingly, the automatic assignment step worked considerably better for female names
(3.6% vs. 5.2% correctly assigned) while it worked for only a fourth
of the male names (15.1% vs. 57.4%)! The reason for this difference lies in the fact that for female persons, the first name of the
person is more often added to the street name (e.g. Maria-Theresien-Straße), while for male persons, only the family name is often used, making it impossible to detect the gender with our automatic approach.

From Data Commons to (Critical) Cartography

317

Computer technology often suggests that everything can be automated and manual labor or interpretation becomes obsolete. Our
project shows that this is a false promise – although all information was available, extensive human processing was required to
complete the process and verify the correctness of the data. The
automatic processing even skewed the results to grossly overestimate female representation, which illustrates the fact that even
"neutral" technical algorithms can and will amplify subtle discriminatory aspects of social reality if applied without critical supervision and the possibility for human intervention.3
Classification Ambiguities
Even if a manual processing step is performed, a seemingly simple task, like assigning a gender to historical names, is not free of
ambiguities. Some streets in Vienna are named after historical
persons (Maria-Theresien-Straße), others after fictitious or religious characters (Mariengasse), yet others may be named after
places that are in turn named after real or historical persons (Mariahilferstraße). We decided to include only streets named after
historical persons in our categorization in order to reflect the social acknowledgement of real people in public space and to omit
fictitious characters and derived toponyms from the gender categories.4
Producing the Map with OpenStreetMap data
In a last step, the annotated street name data was joined with geometry data from OpenStreetMap (OSM)5. Geometry from OSM
was selected and downloaded, using the Overpass API6. The final
online map was produced with the help of the mapmap.js cartographic library7 to create an interactive visualization of the data
from the analysis. Viewers of the map can switch between a street
map, revealing details like short biographical sketches of the historical persons, and a diagram view, where all streets are lined up
in three categories (female, male, other) by their length.

318

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

Response

Although the facts we showed on our map were well-known before and are subject of an ongoing debate in the city, the map got
a very positive reception and is, at the time of writing, the second-most accessed map in the genderATlas. We suspect that some
of the popularity is also owed to the unconventional animation,
showing the powerful but somewhat ambiguous role that "special
effects" have, even for spreading critical messages.
However, like any counter-hegemonial project with high visibility, the map also attracted trolling and criticism, with some critics
focusing on the classification ambiguities discussed above. It was
important to have a clear policy on how to deal with these ambiguities within the project in order to respond to such criticism
(which, however, often seemed to be not intended as constructive
feedback anyway but purely to find flaws in a project opposed on
political grounds); in a next version of the map, we are planning
to communicate these decisions even more explicitly and consider providing a user interface for letting the viewers decide on the
classification policy, for example, on whether or not to include
toponyms in the categorization.
The attempts of individuals to discredit the project based on
perceived errors shows, however, that accuracy of the data and
a clear documentation of how ambiguities and edge cases are
dealt with is of special importance for counter-hegemonial and
critical projects, even for seemingly simple and straightforward
projects, like visualizing the representation of gender in the
street names of a city. The resulting map and data is available at
genderatlas.at/articles/strassennamen.html

Endnotes
1. List of street names in Vienna by district / Wikipedia
de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liste_der_Straßennamen_von_Wien
License: CC-BY-SA
2. List of first names classified by gender / Albert Martin
albertmartin.de/vornamen/
License: Public Domain
3. An example of the consequences of omitting extensive (and expensive!) manual processing and checking is demonstrated by an online
map produced by the company Mapbox (mapbox.com/blog/streetsand-gender/) – although they claim to have produced gender-labeled
street maps similar to ours, using a fully automated process, even a quick
sampling of their maps immediately reveals serious flaws (for example,
on their London map, Bishopsgate is labeled female and Cornwall Road
is labeled male, for whatever reason).
4. One of the main points of criticism after our release of the map was
that we did not categorize the well-known Mariahilferstraße as female
– it is actually named after a district (Mariahilf) that is named after a
church (Mariahilfer Kirche) that is named after a painting (Maria Hilf by
Lucas Cranach, of which a copy is located in the church) that depicts
Maria, the mother of Jesus Christ, considered by some historians a real
historical person. So how would you classify it?
5. Street geometries / OpenStreetMap
openstreetmap.org/
License: ODbL
6. Overpass API / Roland Olbricht
wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API
License: Affero GPL v3
7. mapmap.js / Florian Ledermann
github.com/floledermann/mapmap.js
License: Affero GPL v3
Illustrations
Author map: genderATlas

From Data Commons to (Critical) Cartography

319

320

321

Towards unMaking Maps

A Guide to Experiments in Paracartography

John Krygier, Denis Wood

322

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

The problem with cartography … the problem? The problems. There
are so many of them! The list doesn't stop. It just goes on and on.
It's hard even to know where to start. There's the data, first of
all, with its usual presumptions of … objectivity (whatever that's
supposed to mean); and then there's the host of garbagy … methods, with their pretensions of accuracy and precision; and finally
there's the pointlessness of it all – of so much of it – of the making
of maps simply to be making maps, like we can't live without them,
like no one ever went anywhere until they had Google Maps on
their phones, like the affectation of the need for maps, as though
… what? as though the world would grind to a halt without them?
We don't get it!
And we like maps.
We like maps and we don't get it, haven’t gotten it, for years. We
especially haven't gotten the flood of academic claptrap that, like a
vampire, sucks everything it can from the map. One of us, Denis,
wrote the first of his series of papers (threatening finally to become a book) on the cartography of reality back in 1973. "The Cartography of Reality" argued that the only real experience any of
us have of the world is our own – our own experience – and that the
world that most maps brought into being was wholly imaginary,
thanks largely to all the blather about objectivity and standards.
And John first presented "unMaking Maps" at the New York Conflux back in 2006, a presentation of stuff he'd been working on
for years, of him drilling holes in an atlas to make his Puncture Atlas, of pinning Hamlets from the Driftless Cuestaform Hill Land
of Southwestern Wisconsin into insect display cases ("collected,
pinned in place and labeled, the carcasses of places"), of his Atlas
of the North, to say nothing of his Atlas of the South (the two of
them made by running a single atlas across a table saw) …
Our title here, "unMaking Maps", obviously refers to our textbook, Making Maps: A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS, with
the hope of … undoing it? Something like that. At the very least of
calling into question every one of its endless presumptions that if
you're going to be making maps, we know the way to do it. And of
course we do.
And we don't.
And it's this side of our practice, the side that wonders at … at
the neat line, for instance (where on the Earth is it?), that has us
venturing into patacartography, the cartographic face of pataphysics, the discipline described by Alfred Jarry at the beginning of the
last century as "the science of the realm beyond metaphysics;" or,
and perhaps better because even broader, paracartography, those
mapmaking practices that lie beside or beyond the mapmaking
that cartographers have strained to confine. More generally, if
cartography is contemporary accepted theory and practice, then
patacartography and paracartography are map-making theories
and practices that lie outside the limits of cartography. Dissatisfaction with these limits is rampant, especially when it comes to
expressing ranges of human, social, and cultural phenomena. Yet
experiments towards alternatives have been circumscribed. One
constraint is that we have all so internalized cartographic conventions that we can't easily think outside them. Undoing, confounding, and/or contradicting these conventions may be one way to get
into alternative mappings.
Alternative mappings could range widely. They could borrow
from or hybridize conventional cartography, maybe even influ-

ence it, but they are never obliged to conform to its ideas of what
maps are supposed to be. The maps of artists, of activists engaged
in indigenous and counter-mapping, diagrammatic social mapping, and maps guiding or emerging from psychogeographic activities are but a few examples of the forms paracartography may
take, but others may reach for the wild blue yonder.
The outcomes of the paracartographic practices and experiments we're exploring may expand the possibilities of mapping,
may be funny or amusing, may undermine mainstream cartographic theory and practice, may be a waste of time, may help
to understand the conventions and limitations of maps, may be
stupid or puerile or may even leak out into the world, inspiring
engagement with place and landscape. unMaking Maps: A Guide to
Experiments in Paracartography is aimed at the growing number of
people who want to explore the possibilities of mapping … beyond
accepted practice.
But why? Why would anyone want to do this?
The paracartographic answer would be, "Why not?", which is
pretty unanswerable, but there are plenty of more reasonable answers, too. Perhaps the most important is that while most maps
are unfathomably authoritative – they're right, they're accurate
pictures of our world – they're simultaneously incredibly impoverished. That is, they may be right, but right about so unbelievably
little. The world we actually live in is richly multidimensional, it
has sunlight and starlight, it has shadows, it has birdsong and the
roar of motorcycles, it has people and animals, and it's powerfully
dynamic, changing not just day by day, but minute by minute and
year by year. None of this makes it onto your Google map or onto
the government topographic survey or onto the map hanging in
the front of the classroom. None of this or any of the rest of it, which
is the overwhelming most of it.
That is, most of the world doesn't make it onto those authoritative maps which are the cynosure of most mapmakers' eyes.
Given this impoverishment, how is it that they're so authoritative?
How is it that they're so authoritative and have been so authoritative
for so long? For the way we treat maps today is the way we've been
treating them for five hundred years, even though by our current
standards those old maps were so terribly wrong! This reflects the
reality that our attitude toward maps has less to do with the maps
themselves than with the way they've been presented to us. There
are things in the world that we're taught to think about as … right.
We think about these as reference authorities: catalogues, calendars, concordances, encyclopedias, directories, phone books, dictionaries (the Oxford English Dictionary (look it up!)), thesauruses
(Roget's!), glossaries (at the end of every textbook), textbooks (Organic Chemistry – no subtitle needed), the National Geographic, the
Times (New York or London), style guides (The Chicago Manual of
Style (16th Edition!!)), cookbooks, field guides, travel books ("What
does Michelin say?"), footnotes, citations, legal citations, priests,
eye witnesses, constitutions, parliamentary procedures …
All of these – there really aren't that many – constitute objectifying resources that permit a claimant to insist that, "It is not
I, not I who says this, but …" before dropping, like a tombstone,
the name of a reference object (Langenscheidt's, the Wikipedia,
Larousse, Merck). Maps are exactly like the rest of these: the maps
of Google, Hammond, Bartholomew, Rand-McNally, Esselte, the
National Geographic Society, AAA, Mobil, Michelin, the United

Towards unMaking Maps

323

States Geological Survey, other national mapping services, state
and provincial highway maps, the Thomas Guides, Falk's, bus
maps, maps of metro lines … Maps objectify by winnowing out our
personal agency, replacing it with that of a reference object so constructed by so many people over so long a time that it might as well
have been constructed by no one at all ("It is not I who says this,
but … the entire human race"). Citation enhances a source's authority but also the authority of the one who cites it. The reflected light
is blinding. Opposition is extinguished.
"You don't believe the map? Check it out!"
unMaking Maps want to recover what actually is lost when everything is given away, and we think the easiest way to do this is by
making fun of cartography as she's writ. Laughter: it undoes every
authority. For example, we all know the story of how we figured
out the earth was a sphere (Eratosthenes, mariners, Columbus,
Magellan, photos from space), and this story is told to undergird
this accepted (if individually rarely rarified) belief. Despite this,
an insane number of people continue to believe (and insist) that
the earth is flat, surrounded by a wall of ice we call Antarctica. But
instead of defending one position or another – hotly, with indignation – what if you simply … squash them together as John has here?
Immediately the corners of the mouth rise.
Contrariwise, what if you take something that's indubitably
flat – like the US state of Wisconsin – and "project" it onto a globe,
as John has here? Again, the corners of the mouth rise.
In both cases, instead of adding to the volume of stuff written
about maps, John did what had to be done, used his hands to defeat the verbal onslaught from the academic hacks, made things,
performed a material intervention against the flow of words. And
with the mouth in a smile, it becomes much easier to question
other cartographic shibboleths, like scale, margins, orientation,
legends, size, readers, words, symbols, purpose, audience, materiality, need for, legibility, intelligibility – hell, everything. Playing
– playing! – with these opens a thousand doors onto extraordinary
paracartographic possibilities. We've begun these investigations,
but there's nothing to stop you from doing the same thing. In a
game like this, the more the absolutely merrier.
Welcome to the paracartographic wonderland!

324

Counter-Cartographies as Critique

Links
Drilled Atlas: Puncture Atlas of the U.S.
A video of John Krygier drilling through an atlas
youtube.com/watch?v=1e8-QPsZeR8&spfreload=5

Sawed Atlas: Atlas of the North | Atlas of the South
A video of John Krygier sawing an atlas in half
youtube.com/watch?v=A_OtiqobTvU

Towards unMaking Maps

325

This
Is Not
a Conclusion

327

Discussing Counter-Cartographies

Before finally printing Not-an-Atlas, we invited critical cartographers engaged in activism, art and academia to reflect counter-cartographies in general and Not-an-Atlas in particular. We wanted
to complete this publication by deepening our understanding of
maps and atlases, as well as map-making and atlas-making. At the
same time, we wanted to pose new questions and point towards
future ways of developing a counter-cartographic culture. We do
not claim integrity. Instead we want to close this book by leaving it
open for more. This is not a conclusion because Not-an-Atlas does
not end with this discussion. Moreover, it is part of a cartography
in movement that started long before and might keep on moving
for quite a bit.
The people behind Not-an-Atlas, like the editors of An Atlas of
Radical Cartography (Mogel & Bhagat, 2007) do not believe that
counter-cartographies stand or speak for themselves. We believe
that maps can be a point of departure and even a practical tool that
helps to analyze and support local and global change. But only if
we differentiate between the map and the territory (see article
page 86), maps can become part of a "fluid movement whose tactics range from art-making to direct action to policy-making. This
slow, cumulative, and constant work across many scales of action
is what creates social change" (Mogel & Bhagat, 2007: 12). So, in
a nutshell, Not-an-Atlas wants to support emancipatory transformation on the ground by supporting counter-cartographies within and beyond these pages (see notanatlas.org).
To find an appropriate way of not-ending this publication, we
asked critical cartographers to reflect on some questions, to ask
their own questions, to tell us about their doubts, to act and to
react. We wanted to initiate a reflective dialogue, and we are delighted to unite the following most proficient individuals and collectives for this experiment.
kollektiv orangotango+: Could you please introduce yourself?

328

This Is Not a Conclusion

André Mesquita: I am a historian and researcher, I write about
art and political activism. In practice, I have used counter-cartographies in my work while sometimes conducting workshops with
students, artists and social movements. I also make many diagrams
to organize my work as a researcher and curator. Right now, I'm
making a giant diagram for an exhibition I'm curating! (see article
page 26)
andremesquita.redezero.org
Denis Wood: I've thought, written and curated shows about maps
for the last 50 years. I've published seven books about maps, some
in several editions. I've also made a few maps. I still don't like
them. (see articles pages 165 & 322)
deniswood.net
Felipe Martín Novoa: I am an anthropologist at the National University of Colombia. For more than a decade I have participated in
processes of education, communication and self-organization of
indigenous communities in the Colombian Southwest. In order
to criticize the neocolonial processes in South America, I studied
the strategies of privatization of territories within the frame of
imperialism. I collaborate in the planning and construction of the
Self-Communication School of the Putumayo. I am a co-author
of Geopolitica del Despojo – Biopiratería, Genocidio y Militarización
(CEPA Editores, 2016).
geopoliticadeldespojo.com
Francis Harvey: I have been curious for maps for most of my life,
especially "unconventional" geographical representations. Now I
work at the Leibniz Institute for Regional Geography in Leipzig,
Germany after teaching at universities in the US and Europe for a
number of years. Most of my research does not directly follow this
curiosity, but it informs it in various ways.
ifl-leipzig.de/de/das-ifl/mitarbeiter/harvey-francis.html

Iconoclasistas: We are a duo formed by Pablo Ares and Julia Risler
in 2006. In our projects we combine graphic art, creative workshops and collective research. All our productions are licensed under creative commons and are distributed via Iconoclasistas.net.
In 2008, we started to experiment with different cartographic
tools in spaces of collective work. This is how the collective mapping workshops and the processes of collaborative territorial research were born. In 2013, we published the Manual of Collective
Mapping – Critical Cartographic Resources for Territorial Processes
of Collaborative Creation. We are part of a dynamic network of affinity and solidarity spread all over the world, which allows us to
adjust the elaboration of playful and pedagogic resources from a
"tactical horizon". (see articles pages 86 & 183)
iconoclasistas.net
Lize Mogel: I am an interdisciplinary artist and counter-cartographer, working between the fields of cultural production, popular
education, public policy and mapping. I use maps to make the politics of place visible, including public green space in Los Angeles,
future territorial disputes in the Arctic and water and wastewater
infrastructure systems in New York City. I co-edited the book/
map collection An Atlas of Radical Cartography (JOAAP, 2007)
with Alexis Bhagat.
publicgreen.com
Liz Mason-Deese & Tim Stallmann from the Counter Cartographies Collective: We are a collective that began in Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, in 2005. We use mapping to intervene in spaces
and flows of knowledge production, to destabilize centered and
exclusionary representations of the social and the economic, and
to construct new imaginaries of collective struggle and alternative
worlds. Our major projects include disorientation guides, situated
drift-interventions, and community cartography convergences.
(see articles pages 26 & 212)
countercartographies.org

Reflecting and Discussing Counter-Cartographies

329

kollektiv orangotango+: Jeremy Crampton and John Krygier
once wrote that critical cartography is "a one-two punch of new
mapping practices and theoretical critique" (2005). As critical geographers we wanted to focus Not-an-Atlas on counter-cartographies because we felt a lack of presence of counter-mapping practices compared with the theoretical critique of maps. This might
be a quite limited view from a critical geography perspective.
However, we wanted to show that working critically with maps
can be more than deconstructing them and that critique can also
lead to new and critical forms of map-making. So we invited some
of the people with whom we hope to share the same critique of
maps. But do we really? Let's keep it simple: What do you not like
about maps?
Denis Wood: I hate the insistence of maps that they've got it right.
They never do.
Tim Stallmann: I think that maybe the counter-cartographic
question here is not so much "what do you not like about maps" as
"what do you not like about how maps are being used".
Liz Mason-Deese: Well, I think maps are produced with certain
uses in mind, and those shouldn't be ignored. Along that line, I
think it's important to not forget that critique aspect of counter-mapping. So I think what I don't like about maps is that they try
to present themselves as neutral, as somehow not always already
political. And I think the critique of that gets lost in some activist
or participatory mapping projects.
Francis Harvey: I don't like their reification and essentialist understanding for many people from all walks of life, even in the humanities, and the lack of critical distance to their selectivity and
biases. It seems to me that too often maps are needed in a rush
and people end up following the conventions they would usually
criticize or strive to go beyond.
André Mesquita: I do not like the obsession with which the capitalist and neoliberal world approaches the use of maps. This
means the manipulation of data and how those cartographies end
up being used only as means of surveillance, imprisonment, annihilation and genocide of communities and populations.
Lize Mogel: Maps can obscure the data and stories behind them
in search of a totalizing surface. Also, given the ubiquity of mapping in the digital age, there's an over-reliance on geography as the
frame.
Tim Stallmann: There's plenty not to like, but one thing that
comes to mind for me particularly is the way that single-variable
choropleth maps (colored areas) have become a go-to solution
for many non-profit and government agencies which are trying
to "democratize" neighborhood-level data or make it more "accessible".1 Choropleth maps are easy to make, and they adapt to
nearly any quantitative indicator. So, increasingly they've become
the first mode of representation for data portals or neighborhood
atlases that are focused on spatial inequality – like the 500 Cities
project, Healthy City, the USDA Food & Environment Atlas, etc.

330

This Is Not a Conclusion

These maps work well at showing overall spatial patterning in a
particular indicator but end up conflating place-based differences with Cartesian geographic space. This can lead to the hiding of
deep histories of exclusion, oppression and resistance, which have
much more to do with particular racialized bodies and particular
physical structures in place than they have to do with the latitude
and longitude coordinates defining a given neighborhood or region.
André Mesquita: We also have to remain alert regarding our tendency of wanting to map absolutely everything that is around us,
because maps are tools with ambivalent purposes.
They can serve the purpose of freeing, but they can also serve
the purpose of controlling and destroying – "to make war", as Yves
Lacoste (1976) said about geography. Personally, I prefer not to
create mappings of social movements, because many times this
kind of action can give too much visibility to collectives, spaces
and actions that must remain invisible to the control apparatus
and the capitalist/military radar. Perhaps we need to be more strategic than tactical about this kind of analysis, remaining aware of
the actions and risks as well as the consequences of mapping. We
should also realize that there are initiatives that deal with these
questions very carefully and with a great degree of consciousness
about the effects of producing maps about histories of resistance.
This is, for example, the case with the collective mapping carried
out by the Iconoclasistas (see articles pages 86 & 183). During
the collective workshops they organize with social and student
movements, everything included within the map is discussed and
agreed upon collectively. I believe these experiences of discussion
and decision-making about the power of mapping are a fundamental pedagogical stage in the cartographic practice.
Liz Mason-Deese: André brings up an important point here. This
is something we have had to deal with in the Counter Cartographies Collective when working with migrant communities. Many
migrants do not want to be mapped for various obvious reasons,
and in this case visibility could be very dangerous. Consequently,
we chose to focus on mapping the regimes that attempt to police,
control, or produce certain types of migrants. I think this tendency
of wanting to "map everything", something that I see all the time
with my students, is something that should always be questioned,
and questioned collectively in relation to social movements.
Felipe Martín Novoa: I do not like the standardization and the
discourse of objectivity, in addition to the impossibility of generating a dialogue beyond the work created, which produces a
narrative and reactions or an analysis of it by the viewer. From a
deconstructive perspective toward cartography and because the
conceptions and creations of our worlds are valuable for the vindication of our positions toward reality, we cannot cede this role
to "experts' who attempt to homogenize reality through a rational
and Cartesian framework. It is necessary to break with this concept of the representor and represented.
Iconoclasistas: I do not like it because maps are incomprehensible
when they offer very little in terms of communication or because
they are difficult to read – and when form becomes more import-

ant than content and the maps become aesthetic products while
losing their political value. I also don't like it when a fashionable
attempt to intervene through a geographical profile without any
objective or tactical approach is called a "map".
kollektiv orangotango+: We agree. Knowing that all maps have
an agenda, we feel that too many atlases lack clarity about this
fact. Also there is a lack of reflexivity. That was one reason for
choosing This Is Not an Atlas as the title of our collection. All of
us counter-cartographers seem to have something in common. We
criticize maps and at the same time we constantly read, use and
make maps ourselves. We appreciate maps, so it seems we all share
this contradictory love for them. So what is it that maps are good
and better at?
Iconoclasistas: Maps are good for prefiguring actions, recomposing outlooks, reflecting upon our strengths and recognizing our
weaknesses and threats. Furthermore, maps potentiate the processes of territorial co-research. They facilitate reflection based
on a common graphic medium. They turn the interventions into
something playful, allowing to think from other perspectives: less
rational, more sensitive, corporal, emotional and experimental.
Maps rapidly summarize complex processes and allow sketching
the guidelines of a territorial research project, which can be deepened over a long period. Maps help to compose spaces of collective
work in which the participants' bodies play a key role and activate
themselves through the articulation with the others.
Francis Harvey: Graphically communicating geographical connections and relationships. The abilities and possibilities for simple maps have increased in the last 30 years. And simple can mean
conventional, but it doesn't have to. I am convinced that for many
contemporary uses the map you use isn't your grandfather's or
grandmother's map. Today a map is more of a graphic technology
for reducing spatial ambiguity and/or providing geographical insights in the context of institutionalized geographies.
Lize Mogel: Maps help us believe that we can fully understand
large, complex systems. Counter-maps can help us understand the
politics of place.
Felipe Martín Novoa: To me, what makes maps interesting and
full of possibilities is precisely the narrating capacity of cartographies and the possibilities of building diverse modes of thinking
about the territories we inhabit. A few months ago, I was immersed in an exercise of mapping the collective history of indigenous communities in the municipality of Puerto Asís in Putumayo
in the Amazonian region of Colombia. This mapping was done by
taking the marks in their bodies, building a collective history about
identity and understanding the human body as a map. I also participated in another project that focused on the creation of a cartography of analysis of the conflict surrounding the oil industry. This
mapping was based on multimedia resources such as video, animation, interactive cartography, etc. These pieces of work make
us think about maps as flexible tools in continuous construction.
Currently, there is a resurgence of critical cartography, created because of the needs of people and groups to present diverse critical

analyses of the imposed reality. They are building new proposals
of re-territorialization and empowering diverse groups, based on
ethnicity or gender diversity, or the hybrid urban and/or rural
"subcultures" and their philosophical and ideological diversities.
They are thus generating new cognitive processes for a world in
permanent crisis.
André Mesquita: I think good maps are those that produce good
uses. Maps that, through their limits, information, and blank spots,
allow me to make my own counter-cartographies about the world.
I see these possibilities in many of the projects of cartographic
artists. Many times, I do not just want to map a known territory
but to invent other territories, imaginary worlds, dreams and new
constellations. This kind of radical imagination made possible by
cartography is something politically powerful.
Liz Mason-Deese: Maps are good at changing our relationships
with the earth, with the territory, with one another. Of course that
can be good or bad. I think maps are at their best when they are
part of a collective process, when they bring people together in
new encounters that can produce new ways of seeing and inhabiting the world.
Denis Wood: Maps are good at identifying who owns what, at
telling people where they're supposed to be, at laying down the
law. But as Proudhon said, property is theft; people ought to be
where they want to be. And, as Proudhon also said, laws "are spider webs for the rich and mighty, steel chains for the poor and
weak, fishing nets in the hands of government", which could also
be a good definition of most maps. So maps are good at doing bad
things!
André Mesquita: I also like to think of the many connections
present in the maps as energy flows, like the great organograms
produced by the Bureau d'Études (see article page 26). You can
look at those flowcharts as if they were a visualization of a company's actors; however, the administrative aesthetics used by the Bureau d'Études for re-appropriating a standardized or even military
model of visual organization is what can change a "bad" map into a
very powerful and interesting image. I think that this is an example of how counter-cartographies produce new subjectivities and
new desires for researching and discovering even more of those
processes. At the same time strategic knowledges are created that
feed the actions of many movements.
Tim Stallmann: This question – What are maps good and better
at? – begs the bigger question of what is a map! In the broadest
sense of the term – maps as visual (or auditory) constructions with
some sort of linkage to space or place – I think maps are good at
being non-linear. They're good at opening up questions and conversations. And they're good at suggesting new ideas and new
linkages. I think they are also powerful in that they can incorporate elements of visual (or sound or movement) art, moving beyond the rational and drawing emotional and spiritual responses
in much the same ways that poetic forms of writing open up new
possibilities.

Reflecting and Discussing Counter-Cartographies

331

kollektiv orangotango+: Maps are powerful tools that can be
used for different purposes. And counter-cartographers like you
draw a picture of a world of possibilities and non-dominant realities. What kind of inspiration do you get from critical maps?
Iconoclasistas: All the available inspiration to continue thinking
that it is possible to change the fixed state of things at the mental, material, social and political level, etc. The creation of critical
maps potentiates the formation of complex panoramas of determined subjects and territories. Critical maps allow a memorable
view from a bird's perspective as you travel in a reflective way over
a determined space and time. During this flight, everything is possible: a simple distraction or a comment from another participant
could initiate a memory or a surprising experience. A powerful
picture can help to create similar perspectives. Also, the processes
of dissent or temporary disagreement regarding perspectives on
the territory create tensions and evolve when the playing field is
defined by a "tactical horizon" of common goals.
Denis Wood: Critical maps give me the sense that it's not all over
yet, that there's still reason to keep on breathing.
Francis Harvey: And that it is possible to be critical with and about
maps in a proverbial sea of mediocrity. Cartographical clarity and
power remain inspiring.
Lize Mogel: Critical maps tell very different stories and have different political effects than conventional and institutional maps
do. Around the time that Alexis Bhagat and I started working on
An Atlas of Radical Cartography in the mid-2000s, I was inspired
by the maps of counter-cartographers like Bureau d'Études (see
article page 26), Philippe Rekacewicz (see article page 244) and
hackitectura. They were mapping global flows as well as creating
more local counter-maps, such as the Spatial Information Design
Lab's mapping of "million dollar blocks" and the Institute for Infinitely Small Things' "pay to play" mapping of Cambridge, MA. I
am interested in the inherent and visible politics of these kinds of
mappings, and how they serve spatial justice.
Felipe Martín Novoa: More than inspiration, it was kind of like
diarrhea because the beginning of our work on cartography resulted from work we were doing in response to the militarization of
the US military bases in Colombia. Thus the process developed
along with several street art collectives and along with street interventions and transmissions. Out of this process, the need to shed
light on what was happening at that moment arose. After compiling all the information, a friend suggested to create a map for
sharing the wealth of information in a way that would be simpler
to understand and also attractive from a design perspective.
André Mesquita: I consider myself a punk cartographer! I think
the first critical maps I found in my life that inspired me were in
some of the lyrics of punk bands, such as "Map Ref. 41°N 93°W"2
by Wire or even "End on End"3 – a song by Rites of Spring that
does not directly engage with cartography, but I always imagined
that the song could also be about someone in a room choosing
data and information, making diagrams of secret powers over and

332

This Is Not a Conclusion

over again very intensely in order to understand the world's cycles
– such as Mark Lombardi (see article page 26). Songs inspire me
to think about maps all the time. For instance, the record Yanqui
U.X.O. (2002) by Godspeed You! Black Emperor: On the back of
the cover you find a diagram with the names of the most important record companies and world entertainment conglomerates,
directly or indirectly connected corporations allied with the industrial-military complex. Even though the graphics were quite
limited, that information blew my mind!
kollektiv orangotango+: But, apart from your personal connection between punk and cartography, is there another link between
these seemingly distant cultures?
André Mesquita: One of the best qualities of critical maps is that
they are tools in the best do-it-yourself spirit. I was very inspired
by connecting with Chris Jones and the 56ª, an info shop that has
existed in the neighborhood of Elephant & Castle in London
since 1991 (see 56a.org.uk). Chris has an archive of critical maps
created by the 56ª, and he organized a festival in 2005 called You
Are Here But Why? The festival included an exhibition of alternative maps produced by collectives and during workshops. My
contact with the 56ª was important because I could see that Chris
and his colleagues were producing maps that were not only related
to the process of gentrification and real estate speculation of Elephant & Castle. They were also creating diagrams, timelines and
diverse graphics about unusual occurrences that I also found quite
interesting, such as punk rock and reggae events or the history of
the workers' autonomy in Italy. There was not only one theme to
be studied on these maps, and that made me realize that critical
maps are inspirational because they open up to life – they are open
to the organization of ideas, to the telling of stories and to suggesting alternative futures. What is inspiring about these maps – based
on my interest in music and autonomous spaces – is that all of this
goes against the establishment, and for me this is the spirit of what
we do and the spirit of this anti-atlas.
Tim Stallmann: Critical maps, more than anything, give me the inspiration of knowing that other people in the world are out there
doing this kind of work. To me, each map is a potential conversation: How did you come up with that design? How did you collect
that data? What have the intended and not intended effects (and affects) been? And then, maybe, what should we build together next?
kollektiv orangotango+: We think these are exactly the issues
that inspired us to publish Not-an-Atlas. So, with this in mind, we
dove into the world of counter-mapping. We started to ask ourselves what it meant to (not) publish an atlas, and we reflected on
existing counter-atlases. On our journey we shifted from Critical
Atlas to Anti-Atlas to An Atlas from Below until we finally agreed on
This Is Not an Atlas. So "atlas" was a central topic in our discussions
during the editing process. Eventually we asked ourselves: If this
is not an atlas, what is an atlas? Now we are curious to know from
you: What do you think of when you hear the word "atlas"?
Iconoclasistas: I think about something enormous, worldwide
and expanded, a general panoramic view of things, a complex pic-

ture about a particular theme, a gesture of arrogance necessary to
create a story, and therefore something that causes fear but also
curiosity. And it is also an expression that is hip, hackneyed and in
many cases has become meaningless.
Tim Stallmann: I always get excited when I hear the word atlas. It
makes me think that someone, or some group of people, has taken
the time to create or curate a set of maps which explore a theme
through a diverse range of dimensions – I expect to see a wide
range of maps in an atlas. But I also expect some sort of narrative
flow I can sink my teeth into and really curl up with.
Denis Wood: What comes to mind when I hear the word "atlas"
is Atlas, the African king, renowned as an astrologer, whom Mercator put in the frontispiece to the collection of maps that he intended as … but a part of a gigantic cosmogonic meditation that he
was calling … Atlas. This Atlas of Mercator's was never intended
solely as a collection of maps. It just so happened that the maps
were the only part he managed to publish in his lifetime. And even
so, "atlas" became a term for far more than a collection of maps: It
could be a collection of anything – blood vessels or fish, for example – arranged in some kind of systemic fashion. Or, like Gerhard
Richter's Atlas, a collection of photographs, newspaper cuttings
and sketches barely arranged at all. That's what I think of …
Francis Harvey: Here I want to point to Micheal Serre's atlas, a
significant work by him, which takes up the cultural significance
of the atlas in post-enlightenment science and society. Bruno Latour's discussion of globes in Facing Gaia seem to offer some important ideas in this direction. The globe seems to transcend our
experiences but, like the atlas, it is never transcendent but just a
model bound up in our material knowledge and experience. Its
authority arises in its political capillary power based on the myth
of atlas as interpreted by cartographers for hundreds of years. The
potential of this power also comes from its relevance and function.
Lize Mogel: An atlas is a heavy tome, an authority, a reference,
utility: it defines the territory, speaks the language of institutions,
gathers dust. A counter-atlas is created from the political moment,
it is made and remade, is rooted in the local, contains and transmits knowledges from the ground up.
André Mesquita: For me, an atlas is an open process that merges different ways of seeing, interpreting and intervening in the
world. In his book, The Practice of Everyday Life, Michel de Certeau (1984) reminds us that the ancient name of atlas is "theater",
and that a map puts together in the same scheme "heterogeneous
places, some received from a tradition and others produced by observation". I like to think that a "scene" that results from this theater is a map that questions a cartographic tradition as well as our
positivist outlook on territories. And that it becomes a critical tool
that helps us to know, remember, problematize and especially act
within the world. Through the same interpretation, an atlas can
be a "machine of thought and action", and it needs to be activated
through its use.

kollektiv orangotango+: So then, what do you envisage by Notan-Atlas? And how does it feel to be part of Not-an-Atlas?
Denis Wood: It feels great. I'm happy to be part of any effort to
contest, query, throw into doubt or otherwise discombobulate the
tired orthodoxies of mainstream mapmaking.
Francis Harvey: Very good. It's an important contemporary project
and contribution in a number of fields. Hope there will be an exhibit.
Tim Stallmann: I'm excited but also curious to see the finished
product – how will Not-an-Atlas be more than the sum of its parts?
Iconoclasistas: It feels great to share spaces with other collectives,
and we truly look forward to learning a great deal from the experiences of others. We believe that many coincidences are widespread all over the world, and this gives us a common territory we
should debate collectively: Why are so many people making maps?
What use do maps have? Why do we need to explain/approach
our territories from a cartographic perspective? Is this in any way
linked to a wider process of a general loss of meaning, certainty or
comprehensibility?
Felipe Martín Novoa: To conceive of a world atlas as a collection
of critical or anti-systemic cartographies is a supremely profound
and interesting topic. Conducting analyses of issues from a counter-hegemonic perspective while debating the construction of critical cartographies produces a dialogue of thinking about territories, practices and thoughts and using the language of maps. This
generates a central problem of how to exert a dialogue of using
maps. How do we make sure all these projects and participating
groups engage in a dialogue that enriches our work?
kollektiv orangotango+: That's exactly the point! So, going beyond your positive feelings: What are your expectations towards
this Not-an-Atlas?
André Mesquita: I think that an anti/not-atlas does not simply negate or reject official maps. Instead it creates new conventions and definitions and especially produces counter-memories,
counter-narratives and alternative social exercises of counter-cartography. Rejecting a traditional and normative view of the world
through counter-cartographies must be accompanied by a political position aimed at transforming the territory in which we live,
even if this change – as we know – is slow, difficult and can be
uncertain at times. An anti-atlas must direct us to the autonomous
movements of resistance and collective action; it must be open to
affect and be affected by social struggles and by people who are in
the streets, fighting against the violence and inequality of this capitalist/patriarchal/racist system. Producing an anti-atlas means
creating dissent and ways to act along with these movements; it is
a way to destabilize what is assumed to be "the only" and "official"
truth about our history.
Felipe Martín Novoa: Beyond thinking about maps as alternative,
counter-hegemonic or anti-capitalist narratives, we need to think
about the processes underlying the creation of each of our own

Reflecting and Discussing Counter-Cartographies

333

works and the wealth that each of these conceptions, reflected in
our cartographies, represents. We need to think about the artistic
aspect of these maps while also understanding the critical and collective analysis of the art that maps entail.
kollektiv orangotango+: For us as editors and activists it would
be the greatest reward to know that this collection of counter-cartographies leads to new maps and solidary cooperation. That it
inspires emerging cartographers and supports grassroot movements struggling for a more free, egalitarian and ecological global
society. It is a great pleasure to be in touch with over a hundred
counter-cartographers, to know about all these different struggles around the world, to be reminded that all these people are
fighting day by day to create another world. But after reviewing
so many maps from different places, it somehow looks like a globalized panorama of mappings of globalized struggles. So we ask
ourselves if there is still space for the prospering of a local mapping culture? What kind of local differences and specifics do you
observe in counter-cartographies? Or is it already a homogenized
global culture?
Tim Stallmann: My experience has been that counter-cartographies are still very much a "minor" knowledge, one that is passed
on by word of mouth and through personal encounters rather
than through a formalized canon. There seem to be many counter-cartographies, although it is hard to say that any of them are
not globalized – but rather there are multiple globalized cultures
of counter-cartography, each located in different places. From my
own position in Durham, North Carolina, a network of counter-cartographies tied to critical digital humanities, oral history,
and anti-gentrification/anti-displacement movements feels "closest"; but I can see many other formations out there – countermapping/counter-cartographies springing from indigenous movements in Mexico, Canada and the Western US, a South American
formation anchored with Iconoclasistas, etc. The differences I've
seen tend to spring from different problems and contexts; they
are not necessarily a priori stylistic differences.
Iconoclasistas: Maps with graphic languages are very communicative and universally understood because "an image is worth
more than a thousand words". We also need to remember that the
West has a hegemonic power that renders invisible other ways
of understanding spaces and territories that are part of ancestral
cultures or native peoples around the world. The great challenge
will be getting to know other forms of approaching and representing territorial space: Maps with imaginary scales, inexistent references or an iconography that tries to mark the "unmarkable". A
map should allow us to go beyond the visible and help us to walk
through the gates of perception.
André Mesquita: As I always say, counter-cartographies need to
go beyond representations. It is a learning process that is alive,
and I think that their existence is tied to experiences from movements from the South and decolonial practices. The experiences
of the Zapatistas and the Chiapas-uprising during the decade of
the 1990s radically transformed the configuration of the social,
political and economic map of the world. Without a doubt, these

334

This Is Not a Conclusion

acts totally transformed our local and transnational views, and
they also have a great impact that needs to be considered when we
think about cartographies. "Asking we walk", as the Zapatistas say,
is something that helps us to understand the idea of a map as an
action.
Lize Mogel: In An Atlas of Radical Cartography (2007), Jai Sen
writes about a late 1980s project in which the group Unnayan (a
collective of radical planners and architects) mapped informal settlements at the margins of Kolkata and used these maps to convince planning officials to provide services to settlers. He writes:
"After all is said and done, the maps that we at Unnayan prepared
used the same vocabulary of mapping the world as those with
power-over did. The techniques of representation we used were
all drawn from our skills as professionals trained in the formal
worlds of planning and architecture. We rarely discussed or developed the maps with those whose lives and struggles we were documenting. There is nothing wrong (and everything right) about using such skills for counter-purposes. The questions nevertheless
arise: What would the maps have been like if we had developed
them with the settlers themselves? Did the settlers have a vocabulary of their own for mapping the world around them, as many
folk cultures do? And would such maps have lived on, including
through memory and oral culture, in ways that our maps could
not and did not?" In most of the counter-mapping projects I have
seen (or created), the map's political agency hinges on its use of accepted mapping techniques to speak the language of power. Does
the choice to use this language preclude other kinds of more local
representation? Can other forms of local representation gain the
same power as the map? Map and data literacy is important, but
what do we lose by prioritizing the form of the map?
kollektiv orangotango+: … and this brings us back to the discussion: in what ways Not-an-Atlas is or is not an atlas? We say it is
not an atlas as it does not claim any integrity or completeness. Instead it is to be understood as a possible, preliminary encounter
of mapping experiences. It is not a finished project but has to be
continued. In this sense, the online version notanatlas.org will be
dynamic, open for new maps, processes and representations. Notan-Atlas should not be seen as the standard reference representing the state of the art of counter-cartography. It needs to be contested in its form and content. So we should ask ourselves: What
do these supposed counter-cartographies need to truly overcome
dominant representations, languages and aesthetics?
Iconoclasistas: It is something that we need to propose as a constant challenge, as a permanent question in each process that we
develop! For example, how can we incorporate the maps of the
communities that have no access to the internet? Or the maps
which are only passed along by spoken language? Or those who
represent their territories through dances, songs or food? It would
be wonderful to think of maps as living organisms, because we
know that by creating a map, we take a "picture of the moment",
but at the same time the depicted territories are in steady change
and transformation. So, how can we represent this open sense that
maps should have? How can we visualize that they are in continuously constructed subjectively?

Felipe Martín Novoa: It would be good to rethink the construction of these new territorialities from a perspective of diversity
of identities. Thereby the construction of and the return to invisibilized or forgotten struggles signifie critical mapping beyond
simply considering it as a tool. In doing so, the aim would be to
transcend the space of maps as such, highlighting the transformative capacity of collectivities dialoguing from different spaces and
visions: maps talking with maps. This is a perspective of how to
understand our realities and proposals.

cussion we are having here will reinforce present struggles and inspire new counter-cartographers maybe precisely by emphasizing
the common grounds of this cartographic multitude. We thank all
of you for participating in this discussion and hope to find ways to
continue this dialogue.

Lize Mogel: Counter-mapping can be a kind of "sousveillance".
Even as mapping from below gives our communities the power of
visibility, these representations and data sets are then also available to the interests of capital.

Translation support by Carla Guerrón-Montero & Nicole Jullian

Tim Stallmann: I myself often fall into the trap of describing
counter-cartography by using a temporal story about maps: Maps
once were tools of the Empire and the state then critical cartographers developed new ways of reading maps; now counter-cartographers attempt to use those same tools in the service of justice
movements. But the more I study history, the more I realize that
critical and counter-movements have been a constant presence,
one that state power is continually trying to erase. I think that
counter-cartographies (including This Is Not an Atlas) have a blind
spot concerning our historical predecessors, and I want to challenge myself and others, over the forthcoming decade, to continue
unearthing and sharing examples of counter-cartographies of the
past!
Francis Harvey: I see this question in relation to Magritte's famous painting, e.g. La Trahison des Images ("Ceci, n'est pas une
pipe") and the paradox of reality in the ideology of implicit essentialism that lubricates capitalist discourse. Maybe the most overlooked blind spot is how distortions and biases from maps and atlases lurk in the shadows, but are really in plain sight. The sense
of "let the atrocious images haunt us", as Susan Sontag put it, has
become more and more present in societies I know. Too often,
too easily and too blissfully we seem to slide over the erasures and
complexities of maps and atlases.

Severin Halder, Paul Schweizer, Boris Michel and Laurenz Virchow
have been speaking for kollektiv orangotango+.

Endnotes
1. There’s an active and interesting discourse by, for example, the Detroit
Digital Justice Coalition or the Our Data Bodies project, about whether
these sorts of “data portals” increase participation or actually increase
surveillance of marginalized communities, but I’m not talking about that
here.
2. “An unseen ruler defines with geometry; An unrulable expanse of
geography; An aerial photographer over-exposed; To the cartologist’s
2D images knows; The areas where the water flowed; So petrified, the
landscape grows; Straining eyes try to understand; The works, incessantly
in hand; The carving and the paring of the land; The quarter square, the
graph divides; Beneath the rule, a country hides; Interrupting my train of
thought; Lines of longitude and latitude; Define and refine my altitude
[…].”
3. “I've had days of end on end, Where nothing changed 'cause nothing
ever began, Restless movement in an empty room, Gathering shadows
of a darkened blue; And oh, it feels so strange, Oh, it feels so strange
when it comes again; Cycles of end on end, Edges begin to blend, Time
following time, A pattern becomes defined […].”
References
Certeau, M. de 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkley: University of
California Press.
Crampton, J.W. & Krygier, J. 2005. An Introduction to Critical Cartography.
ACME: An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies, 4 (1): 11-33.
Lacoste, Y. 1976. La géographie, ça sert, d'abord, à faire la guerre. Paris: Maspero.
Mogel, L. & Bhagat, A. eds. 2007. An Atlas of Radical Cartography. Los Angeles:
Journal of Aesthetics & Protest Press.

André Mesquita: Will we be able to go beyond discussions about
representations and power of maps from this atlas and transform
our lives? We are talking about social change here! In Brazil, as
well as in most regions of Latin America, we are living a terrible
social and political moment. I hope that the maps and histories of
this anti-atlas help us to bring light to the present struggles and to
optimize them.
kollektiv orangotango+: In discussions and mappings with militants and radicals from Latin America and Southern Europe we
very strongly feel an urge to create common narratives across differences. In fact, we deal with a lot of shared issues and we should
start to address them as such, conceiving of ourselves as engaged
in common struggles. We see many parallels between your work
and ours, as well as between the different counter-cartographies
gathered in Not-An-Atlas. So we are already somehow engaged
in a common struggle. Just like André, we, too, hope that the dis-

Reflecting and Discussing Counter-Cartographies

335

338

Glossary
596 Acres
champions resident stewardship of land to build more just and
equitable cities. As NYC's community land access advocacy
organization, we help neighbors to see vacant lots / buildings as
opportunities for creating community hubs, and support local
campaigns to get there (40 successes so far). We create web-tools
that support local land use decision-making (livinglotsnyc.org,
urbanreviewer.org, onedollarlots.org and nycommons.org) and
go hand in hand with our organizing and advocacy work.
596acres.org.

Anna Hirschmann
was part of platzda?!, a network of groups, activists and scientists
in Vienna, organizing campaigns and actions between 2010 and
2013. It fought for access to vacant buildings, urban commons
and a just city, working against the privatization and commercialization of urban space. Parts of the network later reassembled in
the Right to the City Network Vienna.

Aaron Reiss
is a visual journalist living in NYC with works in the New Yorker,
The New York Times etc. He became interested in mapping during
his undergraduate years, when he was awarded a small grant to
map the city of New Haven as he wished it were seen through the
eyes of Yale students. Since then, he has been making maps that
explore how people imagine the places they inhabit – from rural
villages in China, to the outer boroughs of New York City. He
sees maps as a beautiful means for talking about important issues.

Anne Laure Amilhat Szary
is a full professor at Grenoble-Alpes University, France, and director of CNRS Pacte, a pluridisciplinary social sciences research
centre (pacte-grenoble.fr/en). As political geographer dedicated
to border studies, her comparative analysis of border dynamics in
Latin America and in Europe has led her to formulate the notion
of "mobile borders". Her latest research concerns the interrelations between space and art, in and about contested places. She is
a founding member of the antiAtlas of Borders collective (antiatlas.net/en), and co-editor of Borderities. The Politics of Contemporary Mobile Borders, which stresses the unequal access to border
crossing.

Adele Irving
is a researcher at Northumbria University, England. Adele specialises in multiple exclusion homelessness. Through innovative
methodologies, together with Oliver Moss she has undertaken
a series of projects aimed at challenging and informing public
understanding of homelessness. These include Sounding Off:
An Investigation of Visible Street Homelessness and People,
Pavements and Property.

The Anti-Eviction Mapping Project
is a digital cartography activist collective based in the San Francisco Bay Area, with new chapters in Los Angeles and New York
City. Producing data visualizations, counter-maps and narrative
pieces with multiple community partners, the project accentuates
anti-capitalist, anti-racist, and feminist practices. The AEMP's
work is intended to amplify and inform about on-the-ground
displacement and resistance struggles.

Alfredo Wagner Berno de Almeida
is an anthropologist, professor at Amazonas State University
(UEA) and Maranhão State University (UEMA), and coordinator
of the New Social Cartography Project of the Amazon.

Arnisson C. Andre Ortega
is an assistant professor at the University of the Philippines
Population Institute (UPPI), specializing in urbanization, migration, and critical demography. Together with Cian Dayrit, Ma.
Simeona M. Martinez, and Kristian Karlo C. Saguin he has been
conducting collaborative counter-mapping projects that aim to
expose dispossession and militarization in the Philippines.

André Mesquita
is based in São Paulo and conducts research on the articulations
between art, politics, and activism. During the past years, he
was involved in a range of projects and exhibitions across the
globe as resident researcher, (co-)curator and/or contributor,
and has published numerous books. André currently investigates
the theme of secrecy and its relationships with contemporary
societies and artistic practices, and works as Head of Mediation
and Public Programs at the Museu de Arte de São Paulo (MASP).
He received his PhD in Social History from the University of São
Paulo in the Faculty of Philosophy, Languages and Literature,
and Human Sciences.
andremesquita.redezero.org.

Boris Michel
is a geographer at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg (Germany). He is interested in the history of geography, urban studies
and cartography. He never does maps but frequently teaches
about them. He is also an editor of "sub\urban" an open-access
journal for critical urban studies.
Brett Bloom
is an artist and environmental activist working together with various publishing houses: Temporary Services, Half Letter Press,
and Breakdown Break Down Press. He is based in Northeast
Indiana (USA).

339

Carolina Bertolini
is a geographer. She holds a master's degree in society and culture
in the Amazon. She is a researcher in the New Social Cartography Project of the Amazon.

Denis Wood
I've thought, written and curated shows about maps for the last
50 years. I've published seven books about maps, some in several
editions. I've also made a few maps. I still don't like them.

Christoph Lambio
Geography and Information Technology are my passions and
professions. When not coding, you'll find me on a yoga mat or on
a surfboard. I am interested in how informatics and maps can be
combined to make the world a better place.

The EJAtlas
is housed at the ICTA, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona. It is
co-directed by Leah Temper and Joan Martinez-Alier, and coordinated by Daniela Del Bene. It was an initiative of the EJOLT
(Environmental Justice Organizations Liabilities and Trade Project) and is currently financed by the ERC Advanced Grant 20162021 to Joan Martinez-Alier for the project EnvJustice (a global
movement for environmental justice) and by the Acknowl-EJ
project (Academic-Activist Co-Produced Knowledge for Environmental Justice), 2016-2019 funded by the ISSC, directed by
Leah Temper and Ashish Kothari. The EJAtlas is based on the
work of hundreds of collaborators, including academics, concerned citizens, informal committees, NGOs and other activist
groups, who have been documenting environmental and social
injustice and supporting communities on the ground for years.

Cian Dayrit
is an artist who collaborates with marginalized communities
and has produced works of art showing cartographies of power,
imperialism and spatial politics.
Claudia Martinez Mansell
is a humanitarian worker and independent researcher. Her collaborators Mustapha Dakhloul and Firas Ismail are from Bourj Al
Shamali and currently completing their university studies.
Colectivo de Geografía Crítica del Ecuador
is an interdisciplinary collective working in Ecuador since 2012.
We are producing a series of maps, articles, manifestos and pedagogical pamphlets with two objectives: on the one hand to visualize, denounce and denaturalize the multiple forms of oppression
which express and reproduce themselves, and on the other hand
to support the struggles of territorial defense.
The Counter-Cartographies Collective (3Cs)
is a collective that began in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, in 2005,
and we use mapping to intervene in spaces and flows of knowledge production, to destabilize centered and exclusionary representations of the social and the economic, and to construct new
imaginaries of collective struggle and alternative worlds. Our
major projects include disorientation guides, situated drift-interventions, and community cartography convergences.
CRAC Valparaíso
is a cell and collaborative research platform working in the city of
Valparaíso since 2007. Using research, action, critical pedagogy,
and radical architecture, CRAC proposes a critical entanglement
with the public sphere, the city, and the territory as a network of
connections and associations of social experiments. Since 2014,
we experiment with cartographies related to different issues in
the city of Valparaíso and beyond. CRAC is developed by Paulina
E. Varas and José Llano Loyola, who do research in arts and architecture in relation to situated knowledge.

340

Elisa T. Bertuzzo
is a researcher and lecturer focusing on everyday practices of
resistance against exclusionary politics, especially in South Asia.
Élise Olmedo
has been a post-doctoral researcher at Aix-Marseille University,
the Norbert Elias Center (UMR 8562, CNRS) and the national
Museum of European and Mediterranean Civilizations (Mucem) since 2017. She defended her PhD in geography at Paris 1
University in 2015. The thesis is about contemporary practices of
sensitive mapping by artists, urban planners and social science
researchers. This work concerns realms of critical cartography,
research-creation and emotional studies.
Erica Hagen
is a co-founder and director of Map Kibera, which created the
first free and open map of the Kibera slum in Nairobi in 2009.
She is also director of the GroundTruth Initiative in Washington,
DC, where she works with partners to use digital technologies,
citizen media and mapping for greater citizen voice and impact.
Erin McElroy
is a co-founder of the Anti-Eviction Mapping Project and the
Radical Housing Journal. She is a doctoral candidate in Feminist
Studies at UCSC, studying post-socialist Romanian technoscapes.
Fernanda García
is a primary school teacher and biology student. She works as director and sole teacher in a rural school in Cerro Largo, Uruguay,
where she organizes mapping sessions with children.

Florian Ledermann
is a researcher and lecturer at the Research Group Cartography of
TU Wien, Austria. His primary research interests are interactive
cartography and the critical analysis of digital mapping practices.
Fórum de Juventudes do Rio de Janeiro
is a space to articulate oneself and to struggle for rights, especially
against racism. The group is led by Black Youth social movements
and residents of favelas and other peripheral areas.
GeoComunes
is a collaborative cartography project in Mexico. Its focus is the
support of Territorial Defense Processes in both urban and rural
spaces. In 2017, GeoComunes began two new lines of work: a
research project centered on Special Economic Zones (SEZ) in
southern Mexico, and a research project dealing with the real-estate boom in Mexico City.
Geoide en Revolución
started as a group of geography students at the Universidad de
Buenos Aires (UBA), offering a space for debate and collective
actions. Since 2007, we have been the representational body of
Geography students at UBA. However, the group is also open to
other students, regardless of whether they belong to any political
parties or not. Due to individual and collective growth, Geoide
extended its spaces of action: In cooperation with various grassroots organizations, we are working to transform the realities we
study.
Günter Nest
is a teacher, curator, and instinctive photographer. Since 2001,
he has acted as the managing director of Habitat Forum Berlin.
Habitat Forum Berlin is a platform for the exchange of ideas and
know-how around the question "how can inhabitants reclaim,
negotiate and shape liveable housing and living conditions in
urban or rural contexts all over the world"?
HarassMap
is an Egyptian community initiative working to create an environment that does not tolerate sexual harassment and to guide
others who want to replicate our model around the world.
Together we are building a future in which schools, universities,
restaurants, shops, workplaces, and eventually all of Egypt are
safe spaces that never tolerate sexual harassment and always help
people when they are harassed.

Hyderabad Urban Lab (HUL)
was started in 2012 with the aim of conducting research on urban
issues in a way that would bridge the gap between academia and
life at the bottom. HUL believes that the urban grid is an interconnected network of resources and opportunities that should
ideally be available and accessible to everyone who stakes a claim
to them. Harsha Devulapalli and Indivar Jonnalagadda are research associates at HUL.
Iconoclasistas
consists of Julia Risler and Pablo Ares. Julia Risler holds a PhD
in social sciences and is a lecturer and researcher at the University of Buenos Aires. She analyses and writes about the forms of
biopower. Pablo Ares is a graphic artist. He draws comics and
illustrations, and since 2000 he has also been designing maps.
From 1998 to 2005 he was a member of Grupo de Arte Callejero
(GAC).
Imaginando Buenas
is a multi-disciplinary collective founded in 2008 and based in
Montevideo. It is interested in and working with a wide range of
topics from politics to design, objects to territories, music and
visuals, friendship and love.
Ina Fisher
has been a member of the Alarmphone for several years. The conditions of our work have changed a lot since the beginning: huge
numbers of crossings in 2015 / 2016, then the dangerous passages
in the Central Mediterranean in 2017. What will 2018 be like?
Janina Dobrusskin
is an urban geographer at the Humboldt University of Berlin,
Germany. As scholar and activist she's interested in policies of
migration and housing, in commons and feminist geographies.
John Krygier
Maps are strange things: I've been poking about exploring how
they are made, how they work, and what their consequences can
be for three decades. I teach stuff, some of it map-related, in geography and environmental studies at Ohio Wesleyan University
in Delaware, Ohio (USA).
Jon Swords
is a geographer in the Department of Geography and Environment Sciences at Northumbria University. His research examines
the funding and geographies of the creative economy as well
as new forms of cartography and visual methodologies. Most
recently, he's been researching how patronage platforms produce
new forms of arts funding and how immersive experiences can
enhance engagement with heritages.

341

Julian Stenmanns
teaches and does research at the Department of Human Geography in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. He is an economic geographer with a variety of research interests, including the technopolitics of economic space, digital media and global inequality.
Currently, Julian is researching the political economy of logistics
and seaports with case studies in West Africa and Europe.
Karl Heyer
is a geographer who is usually most enthusiastic about what he is
currently doing. This has led him to engage with a range of topics
within geography and beyond, mainly dealing with questions
of social & environmental (in-)justice. Being part of the PhD
program "Boundary Formations in Migration Societies" in Osnabrück and Göttingen, his current research revolves around the
Italian migration regime and the utilisation of space & time in
controlling migrant im_mobilities. Karl enjoys teaching and feels
there is a necessity to amplify scientific and political knowledge
in society, which he is working towards by facilitating (university) seminars, playing music with his bands, and co-editing this
book.
Kartographische Aktion
offers maps for demonstrations and political actions. This mainly
includes anti-fascist protests, but also anti-capitalist as well as
ecological or feminist campaigns. Our maps help participants to
orient themselves on site and to achieve their political objectives.
Kristian Karlo C. Saguin
is an assistant professor in the University of the Philippines (UP)
Geography Department. He specializes in urban political ecology,
agrarian studies, environmental governance, food geographies,
fisheries and critical development.
Laurenz Virchow
is inspired by critical pedagogy, action research, and radical geography. He learns on a trial and error basis, by collectively mapping
neighborhoods, working in them, and sharing enthusiasm.
Leah Temper
is a trans-disciplinary scholar-activist specialized in environmental justice politics, ecological economics and political ecology. She
is based at the Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology (ICTA) at the Autonomous University of Barcelona. She
is the founder and co-director of the Global Atlas of Environmental Justice (ejatlas.org) and is currently the principal investigator of ACKnowl-EJ (Activist-academic Co-production of
Knowledge for Environmental Justice, acknowlej.org), exploring
how transformative alternatives are born from resistance against
extractivism. She is also part of the newly formed MappingBack
collective working on indigenous cartographies of extractive
conflicts.

342

Marc Amann
is an activist in social movements, with focus on creative protests,
civil disobedience and commons.
Mark Graham
is the Professor of Internet Geography at the Oxford Internet
Institute (OII) and a Faculty Fellow at the Alan Turing Institute.
Together with Stefano De Sabbata and Sanna Ojanperrä he
works on a European Research Council-funded project (335716)
called GEONET. The project aims to understand the geographies, drivers, and effects of Sub-Saharan Africa's emerging
"information economies".
Markus Wende
is a Berlin-based animator, illustrator and comic artist with a
predilection for social and human topics.
Martina O'Brien
is a visual artist whose practice explores links between people,
nature and technology, largely developed through engagement
with differing communities of interest.
mapping.postkolonial.net
is the product of a cooperation of the Munich-based activist
group [muc] münchen postkolonial, the artists' lab Labor k3000
and the Ecumenical Office for Peace and Justice, Munich. Its research, concept, publishing, design and programming were done
by a small team of activists, social scientists, historians, programmers and artists.
Mike Jeffries
is a zoologist by training and ecologist (most of the time) in the
Department of Geography at Northumbria University. He is fascinated by how cities are used – modern architecture in particular
– and also by lo-fi cut'n'paste visual methods. As with so many
ecologists it is hard to tell when the child with a net and jam-jar
dabbling in a pond turned into the researcher with a net and a
white tray dabbling in multivariate statistics.
Nermin Elsherif
is a critical geographer, designer, and an urban researcher from
Egypt. She is currently a PhD candidate in the field of Memory
and Material Culture at the Amsterdam School for Heritage. In
2015, she started her own research project Other Maps of Egypt,
implementing academic and alternative learning initiatives like
the History Workshops Egypt with whom she worked to produce
the map shown here. More about the workshops:
historyworkshopsegypt.net/blog

Nico Baumgarten
For some time I studied but never graduated in geography. I did
the layout of this book. That was supposed to be my only role in
this project. But as it was a collective process and I have difficulties to keep my mouth shut I somehow became some sort of
editor of this book too. In my other life I'm taking photographs,
make exhibitions, hand-bind (photo)books, self-publish photobooks (sometimes with cats in them) and build tree-houses.
nicobaumgarten.net

Projeto Nova Cartografia Social da Amazônia
The objective of the New Social Cartography Project of the Amazon is to enable the self-cartography of traditional peoples and
communities. Social movements in this region represent collective
identities referring to particular and territorialized social situations.

Nicolás Frank
is a geographer and assistant professor at CURE, Universidad de
la República, Uruguay, where he integrates the Labour Studies
Group. He has co-organized research-action projects since his
days of student activism.

Raphael Kiczka
is currently working in the social housing sector in Vienna. As a
scholar and activist he is dealing with housing policies, the neoliberalization of urban policies, and migration.

Oliver Moss
is a researcher at Northumbria University, England. Oliver has a
particular interest in phenomenological and non-representational approaches to the analysis of urban environments. Through
innovative methodologies, together with Adele Irving he has undertaken a series of projects aimed at challenging and informing
public understanding of homelessness. These include Sounding
Off: An Investigation of Visible Street Homelessness and People,
Pavements and Property.
Pappsatt
is an art and media collective working at the intersection between left-wing politics and design. The collective is engaging
in artistic and political movements, that are claiming the right to
the city for everyone.
pappsatt.org
Paul Schweizer
went from exploring and writing on urban space as a youth, to
writing and exploring on urban space with youth (and all kinds of
people), co-creating our everyday environments.
Philip Boos
I studied Urban Geography and graduated from HU Berlin in
2015. Since then I have been working as a research associate in
the fields of social innovation and sustainable consumption. I'm
interested in urban studies, mobility research and spatial perception. At the moment I am focused on cycling and bicycle culture
both from a scientific as well as an activist perspective. In association with kollektiv orangotango+ I worked with several authors
and translated their contributions for this book.

Ralph Straumann
is a visiting researcher at the Oxford Internet Institute, and head
of data science at EBP in Zurich, Switzerland.

Renato Antonio Gavazzi
is a geographer with a specialization in biodynamic agriculture.
He has worked with indigenous peoples since 1983, training
indigenous teachers in Brazil, Venezuela and Bolivia. As part
of his work in the Pro-Índio do Acre Commission (CPI / AC),
he conceptualized the Agroforestry Indigenous Agency (AFIA)
for the territorial and environmental management of the Acre
Indigenous Lands. He has organized several books and maps for
indigenous schools, as well as plans for the territorial and environmental management of different peoples. He currently works
as a consultant and pedagogical coordinator for the formation of
an Agroforestry Indigenous Agent by the Territorial and Environmental Management Program of the CPI / AC.
Sanna Ojanperä
is a PhD student at the Oxford Internet Institute and the Alan
Turing Institute. She is also a Future of Work Fellow with the
OECD.
Sarah Mekdjian
is an assistant professor for Geography at the University Grenoble Alpes and PACTE laboratory (France). Her research deals
with contemporary conditions of exile. She's questioning the
asymmetric statuses of "refugees", "asylum seekers", "migrants",
or "national citizens" produced by the Nation-States and international laws, but also the asymmetric statuses of "researchers"
as "experts" and "immigrants" as "non-experts witnesses". Reasserting the principle of intelligence equality, she uses creative
counter-cartographies with people in various administrative and
social situations as a relational tool in trying to overthrow these
divisions.

Philippe Rekacewicz
is a geographer, experimental cartographer and information
designer born in 1960. His fields of research include socio-geographic and cartographic-artistic projects linked to the perception, imagination and representation of space and territories.

343

Severin Halder
My endeavours in activism and geography are driven by experiences with everyday resistance in Rio de Janeiro, Bogotá and
Maputo. These inspirations guided me through the last decade
while working within kollektiv orangotango, the Allmende-Kontor community garden network and academia in Berlin. Now I
hold a PhD, I know how to draw and edit maps collectively but I
still would love to plant more of my own food.
orangotango.info
Sheilla Borges Dourado
holds a PhD in Law with specialty in Human Rights. She is a
professor at the Post-graduation Program in Social Cartography
and Politics of the Amazon, Maranhão State University (UEMA).
She is also a researcher in the New Social Cartography Project of
the Amazon.
Silke Greth
My first true engagement as a critical geographer started in the
field of education against discrimination and the simple pleasure
of teaching. Experiences outside the university showed me a
need to create an open learning community within the academy.
After some years I decided to dig deeper into the dirt and work
at the very foundation of life, where I am now on my long way to
becoming a farmer.
Ma. Simeona Martinez
is an assistant professor at the University of the Philippines (UP)
Geography Department. She specializes in GIS, community
mapping, remote sensing and agrarian transitions.
Stefano De Sabbata
is a lecturer at the School of Geography, Geology and the Environment at the University of Leicester. He is also a research
associate at the Oxford Internet Institute.
Stephan Liebscher
was trained in migration and border regime research focusing
on cartography, space making and movements. He is involved in
projects investigating the participation of refugees and undocumented persons in local services.
Till Straube
teaches and does research at the Department of Human Geography in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. He is an economic geographer with a variety of research interests, including the technopolitics of economic space, digital media and global inequality. Till is
currently working towards his PhD, doing research on predictive
policing, digital geography and code studies.

344

Tobias Morawski
is a communication designer, artist and author. He studied
Spatial Strategies at the weissensee academy of art berlin (KHB),
and works in the Graffiti Archive (being part of the Archive
of Youth Cultures e.V.). His book Reclaim Your City - Urbane
Protestbewegungen am Beispiel Berlin was published in 2014 by
Assoziation A.
The Working Group Critical Geographies
of Global Inequalities (CGGI)
mainly deals with persisting relations of inequality and power
from a critical perspective. We usually work with ethnographic
and visual methods, as well as critical cartographies and discourse
analyses. Our group serves as a space for discussion and mutual
exchange in which we can develop collective standpoints but also
accommodate different types of questions and approaches.

Visit notanatlas.org
This Is Not an Atlas ends here, but it continues online. On notanatlas.org we share more
maps, struggles, projects, texts and inspirations. Here you can also download this book as
an ebook – for free! It is published under the
Creative Commons license feel free to distribute it to fellow cartographers.

Actors and Supporters
kollektiv orangotango

Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung

LE MONDE diplomatique

Foundation anstiftung

kollektiv orangotango is a network of critical geographers, friends
and activists who deal with questions on space, power and resistance. Our geographical activism seeks to support oppositional
actors and processes that emphasize marginalized perspectives
and instigate social change by prefigurating social alternatives.
We conduct emancipatory educational work as well as concrete
political and artistic interventions. These are supposed to enforce reflections on, and the change of social conditions. Through
workshops, publications, mappings, excursions, and creative interventions within public space, we collectively learn how to read
space and how to initiate emancipatory processes from below. By
sticking to the traditions of activist research, we connect theoretical reflections and concrete actions. So far we have engaged in
the fields of right to the city, (urban) agriculture, critical pedagogy,
alternative housing and solidarity economy. All of this is happening through collective and self-organized practice. In other words:
"We're going slow, because we're going far"!
orangotango.info

Le Monde diplomatique (LMd) is linking people who take a serious interest in world events across the globe: There are 37 foreign
editions in 20 languages. That represents a world circulation of
more than 2 million readers. LMd stands out in an increasingly
uniform media landscape for its critical vision, in-depth analysis
of world issues and reports that illuminate the state of the planet.
Since 1995, the daily newspaper taz.die tageszeitung has published
the German-language edition of LMd. Each month the German
LMd covers all major stories from the Paris-based parent edition,
expertly translated, with some Berlin-based commissions, too.
Since 2003, the German editorial team has edited seven different
issues of the comprehensive Atlas der Globalisierung with maps
and infographics that explain the world around us. Twice a year,
the editorial team publishes the journal Edition Le Monde diplomatique with its focus on special issues, such as China's foreign policy, the global food industry or Great Britian in times of the Brexit.
monde-diplomatique.de
atlas-der-globalisierung.de

The Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung is one of the six major political
foundations in the Federal Republic of Germany, tasked primarily
with conducting political education both at home and abroad. The
Stiftung is closely linked to Die Linke, the German Left Party.
Since its founding in 1990, the Stiftung's work has adhered to the
legacy of its namesake, German socialist leader Rosa Luxemburg,
and seeks to represent democratic socialism with an unwavering
internationalist focus. The Stiftung is committed to a radical perspective emphasizing public awareness, enlightenment and social
critique. It stands in the tradition of the workers' and women's
movements, as well as anti-fascism and anti-racism.
The Stiftung promotes a critical analysis of society and fosters
networks of emancipatory political, social and cultural initiatives
around Germany. Internationally, it participates in cooperative
development projects and advocates for a dialogue between the
Global North and South conducted on equal footing.
Based on the firm belief that social change requires a reflective confrontation with today's capitalist society as a whole, the
Stiftung strives to develop alternative concepts and approaches
for a comprehensive process of social-ecological transformation
enabling the creation of a more united and just society.
rosalux.de

The Foundation anstiftung carries out research into commons,
do-it-yourself and sustainable regionalisation. A key element of
this is creating a new perspective on what Western societies understand by "prosperity". Since quality of life is not just about
having a large number of different products, the Foundation networks and promotes subsistence practices in everyday life and
draws attention to their importance for a sustainable society in a
sustainable global context.
The Foundation is involved in a wide variety of civil society-based
innovative activities in urban and rural areas. These include open
spaces, such as community gardens, intercultural gardens and open
workshops on crafting and fabbing, as well as initiatives aimed at
reviving neighbourhoods and artistic interventions in public space.
We also coordinate a research network, document current research
activities, organise research workshops and, jointly with other foundations, award a prize for research into the ecological economy.
In our academic work, we cooperate with various networks of
practitioners, institutes and research organizations.
anstiftung.de

This Is Not an Atlas gathers more than 40 counter-cartographies
from all over the world. This collection shows how maps are
created and transformed as a part of political struggle, for critical
research or in art and education: from indigenous territories in
the Amazon to the anti-eviction movement in San Francisco; from
defending commons in Mexico to mapping refugee camps with
balloons in Lebanon; from slums in Nairobi to squats in Berlin;
from supporting communities in the Philippines to reporting
sexual harassment in Cairo. This Is Not an Atlas seeks to inspire,
to document the underrepresented, and to be a useful companion
when becoming a counter-cartographer yourself.
ISBN 978-3-8376-4519-4

